ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 1999

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 1999

®

1400 Smith Street
Houston, Texas 77002-7361
www.enron.com

©2000 Enron Corp. Enron and the Enron logo are registered trademarks and Endless possibilities, ePowered,
ePowered Media Cast, ePowered Media Transport and EnronOnline are trademarks of Enron Corp. or one of
its subsidiaries. Other company, product and service names may be trademarks of others.

ENRON operates networks
throughout the world to
develop and enhance energy
and broadband communication
services. Networks, unlike
vertically integrated business
structures, facilitate the flow of
information and expertise. We
can spot market signals faster
and respond more quickly.
Networks empower individuals,
freeing them to craft innovative
and substantive solutions to
customer problems. Networks
are the foundation of our
knowledge-based businesses,
and they provide exceptional
returns and value for our
shareholders.

OUR VALUES
COMMUNICATION

INTEGRITY

We have an obligation to communicate. Here, we

We work with customers and prospects openly,

take the time to talk with one another… and to

honestly and sincerely. When we say we will do

listen. We believe that information is meant to

something, we will do it; when we say we cannot

move and that information moves people.

or will not do something, then we won’t do it.

6 WHOLESALE ENERGY BUSINESS

RESPECT

EXCELLENCE

14 ENRON BROADBAND SERVICES

We treat others as we would like to be treated

We are satisfied with nothing less than the very best

ourselves. We do not tolerate abusive or disrespectful

in everything we do. We will continue to raise the

treatment. Ruthlessness, callousness and arrogance

bar for everyone. The great fun here will be for all

don’t belong here.

of us to discover just how good we can really be.

CONTENTS
1 FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
2 LETTER TO SHAREHOLDERS

18 RETAIL ENERGY SERVICES
22 TRANSPORTATION AND DISTRIBUTION
26 A GLOBAL LOOK AT ENRON (MAPS)
30 FINANCIAL REVIEW
63 ENRON OFFICES
64 BOARD OF DIRECTORS
66 EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
66 SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
67 OUR VALUES

On the front and back covers: Five of the 13 Chairman’s Roundtable members of
1999 and the winner of the 1999 Chairman’s Award, Bobbye Brown (far left on
front cover).The Chairman’s Award, which includes the selection of Chairman’s
Roundtable members, is an annual, employee-driven program that recognizes
Enron’s everyday heroes—people who make a difference by living our values of
communication, integrity, respect and excellence in everything they do.

FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

$ 40,112

$31,260

$20,273

$13,289

$ 9,189

$

957
(64)
893

$

698
5
703

$

515
(410)
105

$

493
91
584

$

1.18
(0.08)
$ 1.10

$

1.00
0.01
1.01

$

0.87
(0.71)
$ 0.16

$

0.91
0.17
1.08

$ 0.91
0.06
$ 0.97

(Unaudited: in millions, except per share data)

Revenues
Net income:
Operating results
Items impacting comparability
Total

$

Earnings per diluted common share:
Operating results
Items impacting comparability
Total

$

$

$

$

$

$

$

489
31
520

Dividends paid per common share

$

0.50

0.48

0.46

0.43

0.41

Total assets

$ 33,381

29,350

22,552

16,137

13,239

Capital expenditures and equity investments

$ 3,085

3,564

2,092

1,483

947

NYSE price range
High
Low
Close December 31

44 7⁄8
28 3⁄4
44 3⁄8

29 3⁄8
19 1⁄16
28 17⁄32

22 9⁄16
17 1⁄2
20 25⁄32

23 3⁄6
17 5⁄16
21 9⁄16

19 11⁄16
14
19 1⁄16

40.1
1.18

957

704%
1.00

31.3
698

432%

20.3
312%

13.3

96

97

98

99

98

99

Income
($ in millions)

REVENUES
($ in billions)

OPERATING RESULTS

98

99

Earnings per
diluted share
(in dollars)

Peer
Group

S&P
500

Enron

Dividends reinvested

TEN-YEAR CUMULATIVE
TOTAL RETURN
(through December 31, 1999)

1

TO OUR SHAREHOLDERS

assets, but also from our unique ability to add knowledge to
those assets to create a market-making network, such as our

Enron is moving so fast that sometimes others have trouble

2. A New Economy player must operate globally — effortlessly

based company, and the skills and resources we used to transform

transferring ideas, people and services from region to region.

the energy business are proving to be equally valuable in other

Our knowledge and expertise crisscross the globe. What

businesses. Yes, we will remain the world’s leading energy company,

we’ve learned about natural gas pipelines in the United States

but we also will use our skills and talents to gain leadership in

helps us build new natural gas markets in South America and

fields where the right opportunities beckon.

India. Our knowledge of optimizing capacity in energy networks

In 1999 we witnessed an acceleration of Enron’s staggering

will allow us to revolutionize the bandwidth market.

pace of commercial innovation, driven by a quest to restructure

3. New Economy companies understand that constant innovation

inefficient markets, break down barriers and provide customers

is their only defense against competition.

with what they want and need, when they want and need it. We
reported another round of impressive financial and operating

Enron often introduces a product before the competition
even senses a market exists. Cross-commodity trading, weather

results. In 1999 revenue increased 28 percent to $40 billion, and

derivatives, energy outsourcing and 1999’s two major initiatives

net income before non-recurring items increased 37 percent to

— EnronOnline and Enron Broadband Services — demonstrate our

reach $957 million. Our total return to shareholders of 58 percent

resourcefulness. No wonder a Fortune survey recently named

was eight times higher than our peer group and almost triple the

Enron the “Most Innovative Company in America” for an

S&P 500 return.

unprecedented fifth year in a row.

We believe the future will be even more rewarding. We

4. Success in the New Economy requires the adroit use of infor-

remain the world’s leader in wholesale and retail energy services.

mation to restructure an organization and boost productivity.

Our new broadband subsidiary, Enron Broadband Services, is

The connectivity of our networks allows us to gather

redefining Internet performance by designing and supplying a

massive amounts of market data to provide instant market

full range of premium broadband delivery services. The value of

snapshots and to identify emerging trends. This information is

products bought and sold on our new eCommerce platform,

available to, and accessed by, every Enron marketer and originator

EnronOnlineTM
, is destined to exceed the value transacted on any

in every part of the world, ensuring that we make informed

current eCommerce web site. To reap greater growth and value

moves and spot opportunities at the first possible moment.

in our traditional energy businesses without a parallel increase in

The fluidity of knowledge and skills throughout Enron

capital spending, we have evolved into a series of global networks

increasingly enables us to capture value in the New Economy.

— each of which is a leader in its specific region. These networks

NETWORK ELEMENTS

work our physical assets harder and drive more high-return pro-

Enron continues to be one of the most efficient developers

ducts and services into the market. We believe that our broad

and builders of physical assets. Assets form the foundation of

networks will give us unbeatable scale and scope in every business

network businesses that sell up and down the value chain.

in every region in which we operate.

Layered on top of our physical assets are: (1) strategic contractual

Networks now serve as our business platform. They increase

relationships, which ensure us access to other people’s physical

our agility and speed our response. They produce more and

assets without owning them ourselves, and (2) our market-making

better options for customers. And they increase returns.

ability, which allows us to draw on the most flexible, most effi-

THE NEW ECONOMY

cient components to create higher-value products and services

We are participating in a New Economy, and the rules have
changed dramatically. What you own is not as important as what

for our customers.
By structuring our operations as flexible networks, we

you know. Hard-wired businesses, such as energy and communi-

can accelerate our growth with minimal capital expenditures.

cations, have turned into knowledge-based industries that place

Physical assets play a strategic, but not central, role in the way

a premium on creativity. Enron has been and always will be the

we earn our money, and this reduced emphasis on merely

consummate innovator because of our extraordinary people. It is

earning a return on physical assets allows us to divest non-

our intellectual capital—not only our physical assets—that makes

strategic assets and redeploy capital into higher-growth and

us Enron. Move our assets to another company, and the results

stronger-return businesses. This led to several important

would be markedly different.

transactions last year.

When you define a New Economy company, you define

In August we completed a sale and exchange of our interest

Enron. A New Economy enterprise exhibits four traits:

in Enron Oil & Gas Company (EOG). As part of this transaction,

1. Its strength comes from knowledge, not just from physical assets.

Enron retained certain international operations to create a

Enron has become a pre-eminent energy and communications company not only by building and controlling physical
2

electricity and natural gas markets in North America and Europe.

defining us. But we know who we are. We are clearly a knowledge-

global upstream function to serve our regional business units.
The transaction generated approximately $1 billion in cash

Jeff Skilling, President and COO; Ken Lay, Chairman and CEO; and Joe Sutton, Vice Chairman

3

32.4

proceeds that will be invested in other areas.

27.3

In November, we agreed to sell Portland General Electric
(PGE) to Sierra Pacific Resources. PGE is an excellent organization,

18.0

Other
Electricity
Natural gas

and our relationship has been mutually beneficial. At the time we
acquired PGE, Enron needed additional insight into developing
electricity markets, and we also required credibility to participate
in the markets. We have gained the insight and credibility we

97

98

99

sought, and we believe the sale of PGE represents the best value
to Enron shareholders. After the sale, we will have approximately

WHOLESALE ENERGY OPERATIONS AND SERVICES
– PHYSICAL VOLUMES
(trillion British thermal units equivalent per day)

$2 billion in cash proceeds to redeploy into businesses with faster
growth and higher returns. The agreement is currently under
regulatory review, with a final sale expected in late 2000.

9,200
8,900

EnronOnline
Enron’s primary competitive advantage is to identify oppor-

8,800

tunities and gain an early lead that we never surrender. Clearly we
have gained the first-mover advantage with our new eCommerce
application, EnronOnline. Other services exist, but EnronOnline is
the only global principal-based system that allows users to view
real-time prices for a range of energy and related commodities
and transact instantaneously. Its ease-of-use and price transparency
have been enthusiastically received by our counterparties.
97

98

99

EnronOnline is increasing our overall volume of transactions
and our market share. Ultimately, EnronOnline will become one

TRANSPORTATION AND DISTRIBUTION –
TOTAL VOLUMES TRANSPORTED
(billion British thermal units per day)

of the world’s largest eCommerce businesses. In 2000, we expect
the notional value of goods bought and sold on EnronOnline to
be at least $40 billion, many times the value sold online by

8.5

successful eMerchants such as Dell, Cisco or Intel. Furthermore,
we will leverage EnronOnline to present more products and
services, including many that do not yet exist. Clearly EnronOnline
will be a significant catalyst for growth.

3.8

ENRON BROADBAND SERVICES
Enron’s entry into the communications business is a logical

1.2

extension of our skills and experience. The industry is strikingly
97

98

99

similar to the natural gas industry of the mid-1980s. At that time,
Enron remade an industry characterized by inflexible and rigid

ENRON ENERGY SERVICES – CONTRACTS ORIGINATED
($ in billions)
15.0

business relationships and contracts, which caused either crippling shortages or massive inefficiencies. Enron challenged
conventional thinking and helped open the industry for effective
competition. We have the capacity to develop a similar efficient

12.3

market for bandwidth.
As EnronOnline demonstrates, the Internet is changing the
way we do business. The public Internet, however, does not have

5.5

sufficient bandwidth capacity to carry massive data and rich media
content to the desktop. In 1999 we rolled out Enron Broadband
Services to take the Internet to the next level. Demand for premium

98

99

00*

ENRON BROADBAND SERVICES –
ROUTE MILES OWNED OR ACCESSIBLE
BY CONTRACT
(miles in thousands)
*estimated

broadband delivery services is expected to soar by 150 percent
annually from now through 2004. This market could easily
surpass the combined markets for natural gas and electricity.
Enron Broadband Services is off to a tremendous start: we
own and operate a superior intelligent fiber optic network that
is focused on delivering bandwidth-intensive content, such as
TV-quality video, over the Internet. Our goal is to be the premier

4

provider of high-bandwidth services and applications worldwide.

completion of Phase I of the Dabhol Power Project in India and

The business model we follow is the one we used to create liquid

the successful financing of Phase II, we are well on our way to

markets for natural gas and electricity. We are establishing bench-

developing a natural gas network on the west coast of India.

mark bandwidth contracts and making a market in bandwidth. We

In South America, we have established natural gas pipelines and

initiated the first bandwidth trade in December 1999. The market

power plants and we operate electricity and natural gas distri-

for bandwidth intermediation will grow from $30 billion in 2000

bution networks. Our vision of building an energy network

to $95 billion in 2004. With our head start, we expect to become

throughout the Southern Cone is now a reality.

the leader in this field.

THE ENRON CULTURE

1999 ACCOMPLISHMENTS

Creativity is a fragile commodity. Put a creative person in a

In addition to executing our plans for Enron Broadband

bureaucratic atmosphere, and the creative output will die. We

Services and EnronOnline, our employees helped us reach several

support employees with the most innovative culture possible,

significant milestones in 1999:

where people are measured not by how many mistakes they make

Enron Energy Services

but how often they try.

In 1999 we proved that Enron’s retail business works. We

Our culture of innovation is difficult to duplicate. Individ-

exceeded our goal by signing energy outsourcing contracts

uals are empowered to do what they think is best, and most of

representing $8.5 billion in total contract value, more than double

our outstanding initiatives in 1999 came directly from our own

the $3.8 billion achieved in 1998. Enron Energy Services achieved

ranks. Our philosophy is to not stand in the way of our employ-

positive earnings in the fourth quarter, and its profitability is

ees, so we don’t insist on hierarchical approval. We do, however,

expanding rapidly.

keep a keen eye on how prudent they are, and rigorously evalu-

Our persistence in the retail energy market has given us

ate and control the risk involved in each of our activities. We

an unassailable competitive advantage. While many companies

insist on results, and the results have been quite good. Through-

waited on the sidelines to see how domestic electricity deregu-

out this annual report, you will see how enthusiastic, motivated

lation would progress, we built a business independent of

people have created their own networks of Enron-wide talent

deregulation. Now the retail energy outsourcing market is gain-

and resources to quickly advance ideas.

ing momentum, and for the competition, catch-up will be a hard
game to play.

We are doing something that is recognized outside the
company. This year, in addition to again naming us “America’s

The widening of our lead in the North American wholesale

Most Innovative Company,”Fortune ranked Enron “No.1 in

energy markets

Quality of Management” and “No. 2 in Employee Talent” of all

We viewed 1999 as a milestone for Enron North America.

American companies. The magazine also acknowledged us as one

Our position as No. 1 in multiple energy markets grew so strong

of the 25 best places to work in America. We recognize that our

that it no longer is challenged by any single competitor. Our

intellectual capital is our most important asset, and we cherish it.

volume of day-to-day merchant activities is extraordinary, and

All employees are shareholders. Our values of communication,

that volume will grow sharply as electricity deregulation accelerates

integrity, respect and excellence are equally applicable to our

and natural gas demand increases. In 1999 we executed our plan

dealings with each other as with our customers and suppliers.

to quickly develop, site and build three peaking power plants,

Increasingly, energy will serve as our entrée to customers

which were up and running in less than a year, to meet last

who can benefit from Enron’s intellectual capital and services.

summer’s peak demand. These plants, designed to operate only

The fundamental skills and expertise we use to develop energy and

when justified by electricity prices, are switched on directly from

communications solutions can be applied to many situations that

our power marketing floor in Houston.

inhibit our customers’ profits and growth. It is that core of exper-

Enron Europe

tise, rather than tradition, that will define Enron in the future.

When fully opened, the size of Europe’s wholesale electricity market will rival that of the United States, and Enron will
be ready. We have had a presence in Europe since 1989; today
we have 1,750 Enron employees throughout Europe to provide

Kenneth L. Lay

commodities marketing, risk management, gas services and
wholesale electricity sales. We command a leading position in
every energy market that has opened. With our competitors
just opening up shop, we have a clear first-mover advantage.

Jeffrey K. Skilling

Developing Wholesale Networks
Our wholesale networks in India and South America gained
critical mass in 1999, paving the way for integrated, region-wide
activities in both energy and broadband services. With the

Joseph W. Sutton
5

WHOLESALE ENERGY BUSINESS

number will exceed 50 percent. As the No. 1 electricity marketer
in the United States, Enron is positioned to obtain a good

Wholesale Developed Networks
ENRON NORTH AMERICA

portion of the increase in transactions.
In 1999 we built three single-cycle gas-fired power plants to

Enron’s footprint is everywhere in the North American

produce 1,340 megawatts of peaking power. This power supports

wholesale energy business. We conduct hundreds of daily trans-

our market positions when power is scarce. The power provides

actions, touching every part of the energy market. Generators,

greater flexibility to our merchant operations and increases

distributors, marketers and producers rely on us to make markets,

reliability in previously underserved markets. In 2000 we will add

transport, provide logistics and deliver the commodity. Wholesale

three more plants with total capacity of approximately 1,600

competition thrives on services we provide, including risk manage-

megawatts. These six peaking units, located in Tennessee, Missis-

ment and capital.

sippi, Indiana and Illinois, serve the nation’s most active and

For years, we have led the market. We view 2000, however,
as a breakaway year when we will further widen the distance
between Enron and the competition. No one can read the markets

volatile electricity and natural gas markets.
Other Markets
Enron offers innovative products and services in different

as we do, and no one responds as quickly. Together with Enron

markets to meet the needs of high-volume energy producers

Europe we launched EnronOnline, our Internet-based commodity

and consumers.

transaction service, in 1999. EnronOnline allows us to move more

We have developed a liquid market in coal, where we

products to more customers than ever before. The system is revo-

optimize commodity positions for producers and consumers. We

lutionizing the way energy commodities are traded, and we will

have become the largest coal market-maker in the United States
with more than 24 million tons delivered in 1999. We
provide risk management tools to stabilize earnings
and make capital available to producers as well.
We have brought new liquidity and risk
management skills to the pulp and paper industry.
By making a commodity market in pulp and paper,
we can supply financial risk management tools to
shield paper companies from historic price volatility.
Our clients include leading publishers, food packaging companies and paper and container board mills.
Other key markets include emission credits, crude

benefit from increased volume and market share. Since debuting

petroleum products and weather derivatives. In addition, Enron

last November, EnronOnline has significantly increased our daily

has the financial strength to provide equity and debt investments

volume of transactions. In its first two-and-a-half months of opera-

in energy-related businesses, which can serve as our entrée to

tion, the system completed more than 25,000 global transactions

providing additional products.

and did approximately $9 billion of business.

ENRON EUROPE

Natural Gas
Although natural gas is our most mature business, we antic-

no comparable competition in sight as the Continental European

ipate continued growth in volume and market share in 2000.

market opens to energy competition, Enron’s pan-European net-

The demand for gas itself is on the upswing, the result of a surge

work of assets, contracts and market-making ability is in place and

in new gas-fired electricity generation. Gas consumption by gener-

ready for exponential growth.

ators will increase to 8.8 trillion cubic feet (Tcf) in 2010 from 5 Tcf

A presence since 1989, Enron has 18 offices in 16 countries,

today. EnronOnline will be a magnet for much of this new business.

staffed by 1,750 employees representing 42 nationalities. With all

In 1999 we retained our position as the No. 1 gas merchant

of Enron’s intellectual capital and abilities, Enron Europe is thor-

in the United States and Canada, with physical volume of approximately 13.3 billion cubic feet equivalent (Bcfe) per day.
Electricity
Enron marketed 381 million megawatt-hours of North
American power in 1999. We clearly lead the market in whole-

6

Enron has seized the first-mover advantage in Europe. With

oughly European and thoroughly Enron.
In just a few years, the competitive European wholesale
power market will rival the size of the power sector in the
United States. Enron expects to assume the leading position in
Europe as it has done in North America.

sale electricity in the U.S., and that market is growing rapidly.

We are the largest merchant of natural gas and power in

As utilities divest their generation assets, the level of available

the U.K., which liberalized its markets in 1992. Our gas volumes

merchant power increases. Today merchant power accounts for

increased 21 percent in 1999 to reach 1,500 billion British thermal

25 percent of capacity. Within four years, we estimate that

units equivalent (BBbtue) a day, while power volumes more than

tripled to 53 million megawatt-hours. In the Nordic region, the
world’s most deregulated electricity market, we are the largest
power merchant. Our volume grew 48 percent from 1998 to
reach 31 million megawatt-hours in 1999 —10 times our
marketing volumes in 1996.
Technology is used to fortify our market position. We offer
PriceDesk, an online power pricing mechanism for utilities in the
Nordic region, and Strommarkt, an online electricity pricing
system in Germany. EnronOnline’s unique transaction capability
has further advanced Enron’s technology lead. The system allows
counterparties to buy and sell U.K. and Continental power and
gas as well as other products. EnronOnline will revolutionize our
business in Europe as well as in North America, helping us to
gain significant market share. A truly global system, EnronOnline
is available in different currencies, making it suitable for many of
our diverse customers.
The European Union mandated liberalization of the power
market in member states by February 2000. Competition is having
a dramatic effect on Continental prices: for instance, in Germany
wholesale prices have dropped 35 percent in less than a year. In

ENRON NORTH AMERICA

During the
summer
there are still
brownouts in
the U.S.

that environment, we are a natural partner for utilities that need
greater wholesale expertise to manage power supply and risk. As
competition takes hold on the Continent, we are completing
more transactions than any other company.
With Enron’s broad array of products, we can find a way
to sell energy services in almost any market. Our first transaction
in Spain involved oil, our initial contract in Poland was for coal,
France was receptive to a weather derivative transaction and
natural gas has always been our strength in the U.K.
As Europe’s appetite for wholesale transactions is whetted,
Enron’s business grows accordingly. Our numbers nearly tripled
from 1998 to 1999. In 1999, we completed 24,240 transactions;

ENRON ASKS

WHY?

marketing power volumes of 91 million megawatt-hours for the
year and an average of 1,554 BBtue of gas per day.
Some European markets need additional assets to increase
market liquidity, and we will build those assets where they make
economic sense and add strategic value. Last year we completed
construction of the 116-megawatt Nowa Sarzyna power plant in
Poland and the 478-megawatt Marmara plant in Turkey. The 551megawatt Sarlux combined-cycle oil gasification plant within the
Saras oil refinery in Southern Sardinia, Italy, will be completed in
2000. We are developing the 240-megawatt Jertovec plant in
Croatia as well as a 1,200-megawatt plant in Arcos, Spain.
Our goal is to build liquidity across Europe and serve as a
strong catalyst for liberalization. As our European network
expands, we will be able to lower costs, increase flexibility and
expand our base of services to the marketplace, securing Enron’s
first-place position for the long-term.
Wholesale Developing Networks
Enron is developing wholesale energy networks throughout
the world with a current focus on four regions: India, South
America, Asia Pacific/Africa/China and Caribbean/Middle East.
continued on page 10

7

STRATEGY: DRAWING ON TALENT AND SKILL THROUGHOUT THE ORGANIZATION, ENRON SITED, BUILT
and brought three peaking units online within 12 months to successfully capture the high margins of
Summer 1999.

RESEARCH TEAM

FINANCIAL EXPERTS

GENERATION SERVICES GROUP

Enron’s in-house mathematicians and physicists analyze
power-supply-and-demand patterns throughout the United
States. The team uncovers two regions—the Southeast
Reliability Council and the Midwest Reliability Council—that
are likely to face shortages within two or three years. A plan
of action emerges: site three plants in the Southeast in 1999
and additional plants in the Midwest in 2000.

How profitable will the peaking units be? Enron’s financial
experts work with the research team to run thousands of
financial simulations to project the best-, worst- and middlecourse scenarios. The result is a comprehensive risk-adjusted
return on capital analysis, which allows Enron to know with
certainty whether building peaking units is a judicious use of
company capital.

The Generation Services Group—Mike Miller, Greg
Whalley and Dave Delainey—looks closely at the U.S.
generation market. At first glance, it looks bleak. With
deregulation, electricity could become a low-margin
commodity. But the group won’t say no until it exhausts
all possibilities. It uncovers a fantastic opportunity—
developing peaking units that would be turned on only
when justified by electricity prices. It draws on Enron
resources to respond in record time to develop three
plants in two states simultaneously.

POWER-ON-DEMAND
8

RESULT: THREE PEAKING UNITS ARE AVAILABLE TO OFFER A TOTAL OF 1,340 MEGAWATTS DURING PEAK
power demand:
Brownsville Power, Brownsville, Tennessee, 475 megawatts
Caledonia Power, Caledonia, Mississippi, 475 megawatts
New Albany Power, New Albany, Mississippi, 390 megawatts

ENRON ENGINEERING & CONSTRUCTION COMPANY

THE POWER TEAM

GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS AND PUBLIC RELATIONS

Enron Engineering & Construction Company (EE&CC)
drives Enron’s global development activities. Engineers
design the perfect plant to deliver peaking power—a
low-cost, single-cycle natural gas-fired plant that can
be fired up within 30 minutes to an hour. Faced with a
shortage of turbines in the U.S., EE&CC uses its worldwide contacts to scout out used turbines in South
Korea. EE&CC disassembles and transports them to
Pensacola, Florida, where it hires subcontractors to
refurbish the equipment.

Kevin Presto and Roger Herndon use their knowledge and
experience in electricity trading and generation to review
historical data and project forward demand for electricity.
They know during peak times electricity prices will soar from
$17 or $22 per megawatt hour to $35, $60 or even thousands
of dollars per megawatt hour. At peak prices, the profit margins
are enormous. Once the plants are finished, the trading group
makes the decision to dispatch power. It turns on the plants
right from the Houston trading floor.

With widespread knowledge of state and local regulations,
the regulatory affairs group suggests locations and strategies
to accelerate the process of securing permits for the new
sites. The group helps shorten the review time for air permits
by qualifying plants as limited-run operations. Public relations
professionals work with local civic groups, government
officials and media to introduce Enron and foster
understanding of the project.

9

DABHOL: THE FOUNDATION OF
ENRON’S INDIA NETWORK

In 1999 we started up the first phase of the Dabhol Power
Project, an 826-megawatt power plant, and completed the
financing of the second phase, which consists of an additional

The Dabhol Power Project, located on the coast approximately 100
miles south of Mumbai in the state of Maharashtra, is Enron’s entry
into India. With the financial close of the second phase of the Dabhol
Power Project in May 1999, Enron has gained a pre-eminent position
in the west coast natural gas market of India and is poised to
launch India’s first broadband network. Here is how Enron’s India
network was built:

1,624 megawatts and India’s first liquefied natural gas (LNG)
facility. Phase II lays the cornerstone for a vast India energy
network that will serve as a springboard for multiple Enron
businesses, including broadband services, in the region.
Since coming to India in 1992, Enron has become
synonymous with commitment, responsibility, excellence and

DABHOL PHASE I

DABHOL PHASE II

Enron responds to India’s private
power initiative in 1992 to develop
the country’s first internationally
owned independent power project.
Enron becomes India’s largest foreign
direct investor and an early participant
in the country’s dynamic economic
development. The first phase of the
Dabhol Project, with 826 megawatts
of generation capacity, begins operating in May 1999.

Enron closes the US $1.87 billion financing
of the second phase of the Dabhol project
in May 1999. The financing includes a
liquefied natural gas (LNG) terminal and
regasification plant, allowing India to
import natural gas for the first time. Enron
contracts to purchase 2.1 million tons of
LNG from Oman and Abu Dhabi to supply
Dabhol when the second phase of 1,624
megawatts is completed in fourth quarter
2001. Dabhol will generate 2,450 megawatts of power, making it the world’s
largest independent natural gas-fired
power plant.

LNG TRANSPORT
To ensure smooth delivery of LNG from
the Middle East, Enron partners with
Mitsui OSK Lines and the Shipping
Corporation of India to finance and
begin construction of an LNG shipping
vessel dedicated to transporting fuel
to Dabhol. This marks the first involvement of an Indian company in LNG
shipping, as well as the first project
financing of an LNG vessel.
METROPOLIS NATURAL GAS
PROJECT (METGAS)
Dabhol’s LNG facilities can receive and
process 5 million tons of LNG annually,
about 3 million tons more than the
power plant will consume. Enron
forms Metgas to transport and market
additional gas capacity to third-party
buyers, such as other power producers
and various manufacturers. Metgas is
developing a pipeline north of Dabhol
and southward to Karnataka and is
well positioned to become the leading
gas distribution company in the state
of Maharashtra.

ENRON GLOBAL EXPLORATION &
PRODUCTION
To boost India’s indigenous supply of
natural gas, Enron is developing natural
gas and oil reserves in three west coast
offshore fields. Current production is
approximately 290 million cubic feet per
day of gas and 25.5 thousand barrels per
day of oil. Domestic gas can be blended
with imported gas to increase the volume
of gas sold and improve pricing.

action. This image has allowed us to rapidly develop network
assets, enter markets and ultimately will enable us to participate
in every stage of the natural gas and electricity energy value
chain as well as in the communications business.
India is a technologically advanced society, populated by
sophisticated computer users, and is a large consumer of
entertainment such as movies and television. Enron Broadband
Services is in India to develop a fiber optic network, highbandwidth applications and data centers. Our familiarity with
the country and its regulations, our dynamic India network and
our reputation will hasten the development of this market.
In Asia we are concentrating on two mature economies
that are restructuring their energy markets: Japan, the fourthlargest energy market in the world, and South Korea, the 13th.
The Japanese power market is scheduled to open in March and is
a natural market for specialty products such as coal and crude oil
intermediation and financial risk management instruments.
Enron will assemble a network of assets, alliances and market
activities to offer as broad a range of products as possible.
We have staked out an excellent position in South Korea,

MERCHANT OPPORTUNITIES
Enron is positioned to extend its marketmaking capabilities to India as that
country’s wholesale market for energy
develops. It will introduce gas supply
agreements, energy price risk management and other energy services as the
India market liberalizes further.

which soon will open its electricity and gas markets. In 1999 we
formed SK-Enron, a joint venture with SK Corporation, one of
South Korea’s largest conglomerates, to manage SK’s natural gas
and liquefied petroleum businesses. Additionally, we acquired
interests in three gas utilities and a cogeneration power plant,
positioning ourselves for significant growth.
Our Australian office, launched in late 1998, is capitalizing
on that country’s open power market. EnronOnline will begin to
transact Australian power in March. The market for gas is
deregulating concurrently, and our merchant efforts will grow
with the market.

GAS AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD.

ENRON COMMUNICATIONS INDIA

In South America, Enron has built an integrated asset base
of natural gas pipelines, local gas distributors, power plants and

Enron participates in the Indian
Government’s disinvestment program
and purchases 5.1 percent of the Gas
Authority of India Ltd. (GAIL) through
a Global Depository Receipt offering.
GAIL operates the country’s only
long-distance gas pipeline, which
runs from Hazira on the west coast
to the country’s capital, New Delhi.

10

Enron’s foray in communications in India
is centered on providing integrated and
complete end-to-end broadband capacity
and applications. This includes developing
international fiber and satellite capacity
and establishing an intelligent terrestrial
fiber network that will link up with data
centers in large metropolitan centers. On
this enabling platform, Enron plans to
deliver broadband capacity and cuttingedge broadband applications developed
by Enron and leading software companies.
Furthermore, Enron has great confidence
in India’s potential as an information
technology superpower, and aims to play
a role in facilitating its growth.

electricity distribution in the Southern Cone countries of Brazil,
Argentina and Bolivia. Now that the network is complete, we are
initiating wholesale merchant transactions from offices in Buenos
Aires and Rio de Janeiro.
In 1999, 30 million cubic meters, or 1.06 million cubic feet
of gas, per day began to flow through the Bolivia-to-Brazil
pipeline, developed in partnership with others. The first 480megawatt phase of our Cuiabá generating station in Brazil
began to produce 150 megawatts of electricity on an emergency
basis; the second phase is set to start up by mid-2000.

In 1999 we were able to increase our owner-

ENRON WIND CORP.

ship of Elektro Eletricidade e Serviços from 47
percent to nearly 100 percent. Elektro is Brazil’s

Enron provides vertically integrated wind

sixth-largest electricity distributor, serving São Paulo

power solutions through Enron Wind Corp., one

State. We are leveraging Elektro’s excellent

of the world's largest commercial wind turbine

reputation and customer reach to begin originating

manufacturers. We have sold and/or developed

individual wholesale transactions in its service

more than 4,300 wind turbines, comprising more

territory.

than 1,400 megawatts of capacity globally.

In the Caribbean in 2000, we will begin

With the robust European wind market, an

operating EcoEléctrica, a combination 500-mega-

extension of the renewable energy production

watt power plant and LNG receiving facility in

tax credit in the United States and the world's

Puerto Rico. EcoEléctrica creates the common-

growing environmental concern, wind power is

wealth’s first natural gas supply and will help

forecast to continue expanding at a rapid rate.

develop Enron’s global LNG business.

Through our manufacturing facilities in California

Enron is pursuing development opportunities

and Germany, a new plant currently under con-

in Africa. As with all asset development, we will

struction in Spain and our advanced wind turbine

proceed with infrastructure projects that will serve

technologies for on- and off-shore use, Enron is

strategic interests over time.

meeting increased demand for wind power.

EnronOnline

No one trades energy
over the Internet.
ENRON ASKS

WHY?

11

STRATEGY: eCOMMERCE OVER THE INTERNET IS THE NEW STANDARD FOR BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS
transactions; Enron creates EnronOnline, the first global transaction system to bring worldwide energy markets
into the Internet age. Customers have complete 24-hour-a-day computer access to Enron’s prices in all Enron
global wholesale markets. They can execute transactions with Enron instantly with a click of their mouse. To
establish first-mover advantage, Enron’s traders set an aggressive timetable — just seven months — to launch
EnronOnline. A global team of more than 350 traders, technology experts, lawyers and other Enron experts
is assembled to design a secure, legally sound and easy-to-use service.

PROJECT HEAD
In late April 1999 Enron’s head traders sense the time is
right to advance to the next level of wholesale energy
transactions. Louise Kitchen, then head of European Gas
Trading, takes up the challenge to execute the launch of a
global Internet-based commodity transaction system. Louise
draws on Enron’s global network of intellectual capital to
mobilize a team. Its goal is to break down geographical
boundaries and connect Enron’s worldwide trading
capability and customer base via the Internet, while
ensuring compliance with international regulatory and
cultural restrictions. For the next seven months Louise’s
core team drives the development, design and implementation of a web site that simplifies and expedites
transactions with Enron.
GLOBAL TRADING OPERATION
Without Enron’s strong presence and volume in international
commodity markets, it would not have the liquidity to make
markets in hundreds of products, or the experience and
pricing knowledge to operate throughout the world. Each
trading group helps design the suite of systems that maintains prices on the web site, while individual traders specify
special product requirements. EnronOnline becomes a system
for traders designed by traders. Training on EnronOnline
begins in August 1999, with traders participating in global
simulations to ensure a flawless launch. The first transaction is completed at 9:52 a.m. on November 29 by the
traders on the U.S. Natural Gas Central Desk.

EnronOnline OPERATIONS
To ensure a first-class customer experience, a dedicated
operations team is created from Enron’s broad business
support network. EnronOnline Operations is a global group
with expertise in marketing, contract management, customer
data processing and more. The immense volume of data—
from the 120 different contracts to the changing of customer
addresses—is maintained on a continual basis. Providing
premier service to internal and external customers is the
driving force behind this group, which offers 24-hour
HelpDesk support in more than 140 languages to assist in
the registration and transaction processes.

EnronOnline
12

RESULT: EnronOnline DEBUTS ON NOVEMBER 29, 1999, COMPLETING TRANSACTIONS WITH A NOTIONAL
value of more than $9 billion during its first two-and-a-half months. All of the hundreds of wholesale products
that Enron currently offers, ranging from Canadian natural gas and German power to weather derivatives and
pulp and paper, can be transacted through EnronOnline. Customers navigate across the web site to manage
their energy portfolios free of charge. Already, Enron envisions EnronOnline as a portal with much more potential.
As Enron enters new markets with additional products, the scalability of EnronOnline will allow new customers
to “click and transact” almost anything Enron can offer.

CREDIT/FOREIGN EXCHANGE/RISK ASSESSMENT
AND CONTROL (RAC)
Online transactions happen so fast and volumes can be so
great that credit decisions are required on a continual basis.
Therefore, automated credit and risk assessment control
functions are built into the EnronOnline system. Each customer transacting on EnronOnline requires a continuously
updated customer profile with credit and term limits for
every product type. All transactions are automatically and
instantly screened for credit approval before acceptance.
Because this is a global system, Enron’s Foreign Exchange
Desk quotes currency rates that are then incorporated into
the commodity pricing on a real-time basis to ensure that
prices reflect the underlying exchange rates. Any completed
currency-related transactions flow automatically into the
foreign exchange systems.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (IT)
Enron, recognized as an innovative user of technology by
Information Week and a leading player in the New Economy
by Wired magazine, faces an unusual challenge with EnronOnline: it must ensure that prices posted by traders are upto-the-minute and transactions can occur securely across
the Internet. Chief Technology Officer Philippe Bibi mobilizes his global team, led by Jay Webb. It is no small feat to
provide a continual stream of price updates for hundreds of
products, each requiring individual design and support. IT
not only ensures the smooth integration of EnronOnline
into the existing IT network infrastructure but also seamlessly connects it to the back office systems for contract
settlement, risk management and commodity scheduling.
Finally, IT manages the web site day to day as markets
open and close across the globe.
LEGAL AND TAX
What turns a mouse click into a legally binding contract?
Enron’s legal team works with the project leaders to create
a framework for online transactions that meets global
requirements. Legal teams in each country engineer specialized electronic commodity trading agreements that can be
accepted by the customer online. The team must deal with
hundreds of legal issues and regulatory standards for each
country. The tax group ensures that EnronOnline accommodates the statues of all international as well as domestic
jurisdictions, and both teams monitor ever-changing regulations for eCommerce.

13

ENRON BROADBAND SERVICES

ePowered™ Services, which transport rich media and live, streaming video up to 50 times faster than the public Internet. A

In a world where the Internet can’t keep up with the

carrier using Enron’s technology could transmit a broadcast-

demand to deliver high-bandwidth, rich media content, Enron

quality five-gigabyte video file, such as a full-length movie, in

Broadband Services is moving boldly to establish a global plat-

16 seconds—something that takes seven hours on a T-1 line.

form for premium broadband delivery services.

Customers for ePowered Services include media and enter-

Enron Broadband Services is leveraging a pure fiber optic
domestic network with exceptional applications to make highbandwidth content delivery—such as video and intensive data
transfer—more efficient, cost-effective and convenient than
ever before possible.
High-bandwidth content delivery is the next level of

tainment, financial services, general enterprise and technology
companies.
THE ENRON INTELLIGENT NETWORK
Enron Broadband Services has gained instant credibility,
striking alliances with the biggest and brightest names in the
industry, including Lucent Technologies, Cisco Systems and

Internet performance and an essential platform for eCommerce.

Inktomi. In a move to accelerate development of the business,

Today, graphic-intensive rich media ads account for 1 percent of

Sun Microsystems has agreed to help build out the Enron

Internet ads. By 2002, 60 percent of all Internet banner ads will

Intelligent Network. Enron and Sun will jointly market Enron

be rich media, according to Jupiter Communications, which will

Intelligent Network services to enterprises, software developers

heighten the demand for faster data delivery. The market for

and service providers.

premium broadband delivery services is expected to soar by
150 percent annually from 2000 to 2004.

Our history and our track record also adds credibility. We
have proven that we can make markets that others thought

We are a unique, single source for every broadband
service: a mixture of hardware, software, market-making,
finance and applications. Virtually anyone involved in
communications is a potential customer—content providers,
application developers, network carriers, Internet service
providers and corporate end-users. We are approaching this
sizable market with the same scale and scope we successfully bring to every single Enron business.
Three components lie at the heart of Enron
Broadband Services:
• The Enron Intelligent Network. A state-of-the-art highcapacity fiber optic network, based on a distributed server

impossible, such as in electricity, natural gas and pulp and paper.

architecture, the Enron Intelligent Network’s global fiber and

We have, or have acquired, the requisite skills to develop new

satellite distribution and embedded software intelligence sets

types of broadband services, to market bandwidth capacity and

it apart from other network providers. The Enron Intelligent

to launch ePowered applications. We have the intellectual capital

Network bypasses traditional fragmented and bottlenecked

to build this business.

public Internet routes to deliver faster, higher-quality data.
Enron’s Broadband Operating System (BOS) provides the

scalability and flexibility. In the United States, we own or have

intelligence to the Enron Intelligent Network and connects

contractual access to a 14,300-mile network, which is scheduled

to all physical and software network elements.

to expand to 18,000 miles in 2001. The network connects to

• Bandwidth intermediation for real-time bandwidth-on-

every major U.S. city and soon will be linked to Tokyo and six

demand. Unless it travels a dedicated network, data must pass

major European cities.

through a relay of several separate network operators to its

BANDWIDTH INTERMEDIATION

final destination. It can take months to negotiate capacity

14

A network business model gives Enron Broadband Services

From this asset base, we are building a robust merchant

purchases with so many parties involved. Enron can serve as a

operation. Bandwidth intermediation opportunities are enor-

bandwidth market-maker, buying pooling-point-to-pooling-

mous. Analysts predict that the market will exceed the combined

point bandwidth inventory that it will resell on an as-needed

markets for electricity and natural gas. As the first-mover, Enron

basis at real-time market rates. Buyers will dramatically cut

is shaping this market as it emerges. We are creating the “pool-

costs by paying for only the bandwidth they use, at prices that

ing points,” where data is transferred from the public Internet

reflect the current market.

to broadband fiber networks. Pooling points are to bandwidth

• Enron’s content services for managing and delivering high-

what Henry Hub is to gas and COB is to electricity—a city gate

bandwidth applications. The Enron Intelligent Network and

uptake and download, a necessary reference point on which to

Enron’s BOS enable a new genre of application services, called

base trading.

We completed the first bandwidth trade in December, a
monthly incremental contract for DS-3 bandwidth between New
York City and Los Angeles on a Global Crossing network. (DS-3
can move 45 megabits per second, enough for streaming video.)
We are establishing and pricing that contract as a benchmark. In
the second quarter, we will launch a second benchmark, a monthly
contract between New York and London. In 2000 we know that
bandwidth trading will gain acceptance in the market, and by
2001 we believe the market will reach critical mass.
The same skills apply to the bandwidth market as to
merchant energy services, and we have transferred some of our
most dynamic trading professionals from our North American
and European energy networks to Enron Broadband Services.
Our plans call for providing risk management products, structured finance, investment and bandwidth portfolio management
to the broadband market. We envision working with datadependent customers to outsource their broadband assets and
needs. As quickly as this market develops, we will introduce more
innovative products and services.
CONTENT SERVICES
Enron Broadband Services is strategically positioned where
traditional television broadcast and the web converge. Companies
want to stream entertainment and information on the Internet,
and we can make it happen. Deploying ePowered applications
over the Enron Intelligent Network, we can convey rich media
content at high quality with no delay. Using our services, media
companies can deliver broadcast-quality programming on the

ENRON BROADBAND SERVICES

The Internet is
too slow and
unreliable to
support highbandwidth
content and the
rich media needs
of eCommerce.

web, and financial services firms can present more compelling
content. The Country Music Association used the Enron Intelligent
Network to webcast additional footage from its annual Country
Music Awards in 1999. We also facilitated a simulcast webcast of
Warner Brothers’ The Drew Carey Show last fall. Latinsoccer.net,
a premier Latin American Internet portal for soccer fans, has
selected Enron to carry live soccer matches to viewers’ desktops.
The entertainment market is only the beginning. eCommerce
looms large as a driver of demand. Not only can Enron enable
retailers to enhance their shopping sites with video, we also can

ENRON ASKS

WHY?

help them manage data with storing and archiving assistance. In
an information-based society, broadband services is becoming an
essential, high-growth business.

15

STRATEGY: ENRON ASSEMBLES A FIBER OPTIC NETWORK TO DELIVER HIGH-QUALITY RICH MEDIA
content to end-users. It connects the network to the public Internet via the Enron Intelligent Network
and develops the Broadband Operating System to control the network’s physical and software
elements. Enron sees that bandwidth capacity can be traded as a commodity and conducts the first
bandwidth trade in 1999.

THE DREAM TEAM

ENRON INTELLIGENT NETWORK (EIN)

PHYSICAL NETWORKS

In late 1998, Enron forms Enron Broadband Services to develop
a fiber optic business. Joe Hirko, former Portland General
Electric CFO, and Ken Rice, former chairman of Enron North
America, are called in to capture every possible opportunity in
the high-bandwidth market. They attract the industry’s leading
technological minds to assemble a high-bandwidth network
of superior hardware, intelligent software and innovative
products and applications. They draw on talent throughout
Enron to explore all possible bandwidth business
opportunities.

Enron acquires Modulus, the creator of InterAgent software,
which adds embedded ePoweredTM intelligence to the network.
The EIN’s unique hardware architecture works off a chain of
servers and distributed servers to avoid the delay of sending
data through multiple routers. The EIN can be accessed on
demand and users pay according to use, negating the need
for their own investment in high-bandwidth connectivity.

Enron augments its initial 1,700 miles of fiber optic
cable by building, swapping and leasing additional
capacity in the U.S. By early 2000, Enron has access to
14,300 route miles. To upload and download content
from the Internet, the company establishes points of
presence, pooling points and data centers in 30 strategic markets. Leasing fiber keeps capital investment to
a minimum. At the same time, the unit benefits from
strong sales of dark fiber and data transmission.

ENRON BROADBAND SERVICES
16

RESULT: THE ENRON INTELLIGENT NETWORK ALLOWS CONTENT AND INTERNET PROVIDERS TO TRANSPORT
rich media and streaming video right to the desktop with no delay or quality reductions. Bandwidth trading
permits customers to buy bandwidth capacity as needed and avoid the cost of full-time, underused capacity.
Enron is accepted as an Internet innovator and strikes an alliance with Sun Microsystems to advance Enron’s
Broadband Operating System as the industry standard protocol.

STRATEGIC PARTNERS

ePOWERED APPLICATIONS

BANDWIDTH TRADING AND CONTENT SERVICES

Best-in-breed technology is obtained through strategic
partnerships with the industry’s leaders: Cisco Systems®
routers, Sun® Microsystems servers and Ciena® dense
wave division multiplexors—equipment that is unsurpassed in moving data and content. As partners, these
Internet luminaries give Enron instant credibility with
customers and assist in forming new relationships.

The EIN moves data up to 50 times faster than current Internet
speed and reduces average data latency from approximately
29 seconds to 3 seconds.Media streams on the EIN like nowhere
else, and Enron capitalizes on the EIN’s speed and responsiveness to launch unique and lucrative ePowered applications,
including:
• ePowered Media CastTM delivers broadcast-quality video to
the desktop. That allows the Country Music Association to
simulcast additional video from its annual Country Music
Awards broadcast using ePowered Media Cast.
• ePowered Media Transport speeds video content wherever
it needs to go, bypassing satellite and land-based networks.

Veteran Enron North America market-maker Tom Gros
recognizes that bandwidth capacity should be bought and
sold via standardized contracts, similar to the way natural
gas and electricity are marketed. He brings in Jean Mrha
and other experienced Enron traders and in December 1999
initiates the first-ever forward trade of bandwidth between
New York and Los Angeles. By serving as a market intermediary, Enron reduces the cost and increases the flexibility
of purchasing bandwidth capacity and helps bandwidth
producers and consumers manage price and supply risks.
David Cox sells services directly to content providers, such
as entertainment and media companies.

17

RETAIL ENERGY SERVICES

• We can provide labor outsourcing for energy and facilities
management.

Enron’s retail business surpassed our goals in 1999 when we
signed contracts representing $8.5 billion of customers’ future
energy expenditures. The unit turned profitable in the fourth

to structure and syndicate financial transactions.
Enron’s success in retail energy is not dependent on retail

quarter, marking the end of our start-up phase. With systems and

energy deregulation. At the close of 1999 only 23 states were in

people in place, we are set for exponential growth and sharply

the process of opening electricity and natural gas markets to

increased profitability. In 2000 we expect to again double our

competition. Enron focuses on non-regulatory opportunities,

total contract volume to more than $16 billion.

such as improving operations and energy infrastructure, nego-

Enron has taken the lead in a rapidly expanding $243 billion

tiating utility rates, gathering and analyzing energy usage

U.S. retail energy market. With our experience, international

information and managing complete facilities such as manufac-

presence and breadth of service, Enron alone has the scale and

turing plants and retail outlets. And energy consumption is not our

capability necessary to provide major customers with the quality

sole focus: Enron’s analysis of a retail customer’s energy use includes

of service they expect. In addition to Houston headquarters staff,

examination of less obvious factors in the customer’s energy cost,

Enron maintains eight U.S. district offices with 250 professionals

such as operating processes and the use of labor resources.

and manages services at 16,500 sites with 4,500 contracted

CUSTOMER FOCUS

employees. This structure helps make Enron the only energy
outsourcing provider with nationwide reach.

Enron’s retail initiative relies heavily on the ability of our
sales teams to bring in customers, both large and small, who

In 1999 the retail group signed contracts with scores of

never realized the potential benefit of energy outsourcing. In

customers, including 10-year contracts with Owens Corning,

1999 Sales & Marketing Management magazine named Enron

Polaroid, Simon Property Group and the U.S. Department of

the No. 1 sales team in the United States, citing our ability to

Defense. Furthermore, existing contracts provide significant

develop customized solutions and target Fortune 500 companies.

upsell opportunity, as the majority of Enron’s large retail cus-

Enron has also developed the capability to deliver energy services

tomers recognize opportunities and request services beyond

that take the best from Enron’s experience in the wholesale

the scope of their initial contracts.
The proposition at the heart of Enron’s retail
energy business is a simple one: energy management
is not a core business strength for most companies.

energy business and combine it with responsive
customer service. The result is a remarkable ability
to create value through outsourcing contracts.
Enron is augmenting the retail market with

Few companies have the expertise to approach

new products and services. We compiled the first

energy strategically, and often energy infrastructure

indexes for retail electricity — the Enron Energy

and equipment are not adequately maintained and

Indexes — published weekly in Megawatt Daily.

updated. In addition, companies that use large

These indexes, used as benchmarks for the pricing

amounts of energy can realize substantial benefit

of retail power, foster end-user energy price

when they are able to optimize electricity and

transparency and are fast becoming the de facto

natural gas purchases, benefiting from lower prices

standard for retail pricing.

and gaining protection from unpredictable price
spikes.
When energy management is outsourced to

We are commited to deliver continuously
superior service to customers over the long term.
To ensure that we are serving our customers well,

Enron, we look at the entire energy supply chain,

we have established an interactive web-based

identifying which equipment must be updated

system to measure customer satisfaction. The

or replaced, financing the cost of more efficient

system is founded on key performance measures

equipment and using our extensive experience in

set by the customer and Enron. This information

energy markets to manage the cost of the com-

system helps us determine if other sales oppor-

modity. As a result, companies can reduce energy

tunities exist with the customer, and whether

expenditures and gain significant competitive

both the customer and Enron are deriving value

advantage in the marketplace.

from the relationship.

Enron draws on existing businesses, resources

The engineering and technical expertise

and experience to structure comprehensive cus-

required by Enron’s retail energy business is applic-

tomer solutions and capture value throughout the

able across all customer segments, including food

retail transaction:

processors, retailers, real estate investment trusts,

• We manage the commodity supply or supply it

manufacturers and sports facilities.

ourselves and manage the commodity price risk.
18

• We offer both our own capital and our financing capabilities

INTERNATIONAL POTENTIAL
Enron extended its retail network to Europe in late 1999.
By building on Enron’s European wholesale network, our retail
operation is expected to achieve first-year positive earnings.
Our retail competitiveness on the Continent is enhanced by our
reputation in pan-European wholesale operations and by our
knowledge of working in individual countries. As in the United
States, it is not necessary to wait for full energy liberalization
before moving into the European retail energy market.
Enron alone has the critical mass to roll out a pan-European
network. And for our North American customers with European
facilities, we are the vendor of choice for their operations abroad.
Enron’s wholesale operations also are laying the groundwork for the retail energy business in other regions. Mature
energy markets, such as Japan and South Korea, where Enron has
opened wholesale energy operations, have great potential for
retail business as these countries continue the trend toward
liberalization.

ENRON ENERGY SERVICES

Most companies operate
undercapitalized and inefficient
energy infrastructure and bear
unnecessary cost and waste.
ENRON ASKS

WHY?
19

PROBLEM: ENERGY IS A LARGE EXPENSE AT OWENS CORNING, ONE OF THE WORLD’S LARGEST MELTERS OF
glass to make fibers for insulating and reinforcement products. Owens Corning already was capitalizing on various
energy management programs, including interruptible power, but was looking to further reduce its energy
expenses while decreasing or eliminating the risk of losing power during peak usage.

CUSTOMER
Owens Corning seeks an energy partner that can reliably
serve the company on a national and international basis.
Enron is the only company with worldwide reach and the
ability to provide a packaged solution that includes commodity purchasing and energy equipment financing, as
well as engineering and risk management. As talks progress,
Owens Corning is impressed by Enron’s ability to quickly
present and execute new energy solutions. Enron’s focus
on environmentally beneficial energy solutions also is
important to ecology-minded Owens Corning.

LEAD TEAM
Harold Buchanan, managing director, and Michael Mann,
vice president, lead a team of experts during the analysis,
structuring and negotiations to find out all they can about
Owens Corning’s operations and needs. Extensive discussion
and examination of data are necessary to design the best
customized solution.

FINANCING
Financial engineering specialists Larry Derrett, vice president, and Clint Freeland, director, create and discard dozens
of financial structures until they hit upon the right one: the
formation of a jointly owned limited liability company (LLC)
empowered to execute the agreement. The LLC serves as a
platform for joint decision-making, shared savings and
energy equipment leasing. Energy savings will offset the
customer’s leasing costs. Enron arranged the financing for
the transaction.

20

OWENS CORNING PARTNERS

RESULT: WITH DOZENS OF ENRON EXPERTS TACKLING THE PROBLEM, OWENS CORNING CAN EXPECT
meaningful energy savings as well as improved efficiency and better power quality. Through a 10-year partnership valued at $1.3 billion, covering 22 U.S. Owens Corning facilities, Enron will finance and refurbish specific
energy infrastructure projects and allow Owens Corning to buy energy at advantageous rates.

MEGAWATT DAILY
ENRON RETAIL ELECTRICITY INDEXES
Primary Secondary
Index
INDEX REGION
Index
NPCC-NEPOOL
0.0911
0.1062
NPCC-NPP
0.0808
0.0973
MAAC1
0.0544
0.0761
SERC
0.0437
0.0535
FRCC
0.0517
0.0569

Wholesale
Index
0.0283
na
0.0237
0.0227
0.0239

COMMODITY PRICE RISK MANAGEMENT
Enron will use its experience as the world’s largest marketer
of electricity to effectively predict the market cost of electricity using its retail electricity indexes published in
Megawatt Daily. The risk management team designs a
unique structure based on the indexes to protect Owens
Corning from substantial price spikes that historically occur.
Owens Corning is immune to day-to-day electricity price
fluctuations. Enron manages the risk systematically through
its large portfolio of commodity contracts.
DEAL STRUCTURING & ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT
Enron assigns point persons to oversee deal development
and account management. Michael Moore, vice president
of deal structuring, creates the scope, transaction components and pricing solutions covering every aspect of the
deal—commodity transactions, construction management,
project management, legal, tax, regulatory, accounting and
more. By looking at the total picture rather than each
individual piece, Owens Corning and Enron significantly
increase the potential savings. After the LLC is formed,
Barbara Kortes is named global account manager to provide
continuing service and coordinate Enron resources for the
account. She looks out for the customer’s interests and
works with Owens Corning to expand the relationship to
overseas facilities. Already, Enron has engineered a backup
generation system for a plant in Brazil.
ENGINEERING
A team of electrical and mechanical engineers led by
Cynthia Wishert evaluates Owens Corning’s energy infrastructure and proposes updating air-compression systems
and steam boilers. Owens Corning is not driven to refurbish
equipment because the investment does not meet its internal
rate of return criteria. However, Enron’s buying power and
ability to squeeze efficiencies throughout the energy supply
chain enables Enron to install state-of-the-art assets and
recover their cost.

WITH ENRON

21

TRANSPORTATION AND DISTRIBUTION

miles of pipeline running from Texas to the Great Lakes, serving
the upper Midwest. Deliveries averaged 3.8 Bcf per day in 1999.

THE GAS PIPELINE GROUP
Enron’s Gas Pipeline Group owns interests in four interstate

Since 1995, the system has increased market capacity by 10 percent.
With the proliferation of power plant development in its

pipelines, operates 32,000 miles of pipelines in 21 states and

market, Northern Natural Gas is responding to the distinct needs

transports 15 percent of U.S. natural gas. Returns are strong and

of this new customer. Northern also continues to work with its

stable from the group, which produces consistent earnings and

Midwest-based customers to actively pursue and connect increased

cash flow. In 1999 the group had income before interest and

load requirements in this growing market by offering competitive

taxes (IBIT) of $380 million, or 19 percent of Enron’s overall IBIT.

transportation and storage products that connect these markets

Natural gas pipelines and their storage facilities are a key

to a variety of alternative suppliers.

component of Enron’s energy strategy.

Transwestern Pipeline

The Gas Pipeline Group is benefiting from the nation’s

Transwestern’s 2,487 miles of pipe have bi-directional capa-

growing demand for natural gas. Domestic gas consumption is

bility, allowing customers to direct gas to the best markets.

expected to increase to almost 30 trillion cubic feet (Tcf) per year

Originating in the San Juan Basin, Transwestern can move gas

by 2010 from almost 23 Tcf at present. Much of that consump-

east to Texas or west to the California border. Daily delivery

tion is driven by the use of natural gas to fuel new electricity

averaged 1.5 Bcf in 1999.

generation. Unlike industrial users, generators require more

In January 2000 Transwestern’s Gallup expansion project

flexibility and choices in gas delivery. To meet the new demands

was approved by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

of the market, we are expanding all systems to transport

(FERC). The addition of one compressor station near Gallup, New
Mexico, and two coolers at the La Plata and Blanco
Hub will increase capacity to the California border
by 140 million cubic feet per day (MMcf/d).
Florida Gas Transmission
Florida Gas Transmission, the sole interstate
natural gas pipeline serving peninsular Florida, is
the fastest growing system in North America. With
a surge in state population and demand for gasfired electric generation, Florida Gas Transmission
is working on two major expansions. Phase IV will
consist of pipe and compression to extend its network

more gas to more users, and providing those users with more

to southwest Florida and add capacity of nearly 200 MMcf/d. This

flexible choices.

project is scheduled to be in service by mid-2001. The proposed

Perhaps more than any other pipeline operator, Enron’s Gas

MMcf/d of capacity and has an in-service date of 2002. The

Value-added products and services beyond transportation allow

proposal was filed in December with FERC.

us to leverage our assets, build a knowledge-based business and

The 4,795-mile pipeline had average daily capacity of 1.5 Bcf

keep our pipelines fully subscribed and running at capacity in the

in 1999.

face of increased competition. We also operate with one of the

Northern Border Pipeline

lowest cost structures in the industry, which gives us a distinct
advantage over competitors.
The expansion of our systems has been facilitated by

Northern Border Pipeline runs from the U.S./Canadian
border in Montana to Illinois, transporting approximately 23
percent of all Canadian gas imports to the U.S. The pipeline

Enron’s regulatory, engineering and construction skills, which

measures 1,214 miles and averaged daily deliveries of 2.4 Bcf in

allow us to speed implementation.

1999. The Chicago Project expansion was put in service at the

The Gas Pipeline Group continues to be recognized for its

end of 1998. By interconnecting with multiple pipeline systems,

superior environmental record. For the third year running, we

this link fundamentally changed North American markets by

won the Environmental Protection Agency’s Star Program

establishing a new relationship between Canadian and NYMEX

Transmission Partner of the Year award, the only gas transmis-

gas prices. Northern Border has proposed a second expansion,

sion company to receive the award since its inception in 1997.

Project 2000, to connect to Northern Indiana Public Service

The Gas Pipeline Group operates four interstate pipelines

Company and its industrial customer base in the Midwest.

that move approximately 9.2 billion cubic feet (Bcf) of gas daily:
Northern Natural Gas
Northern Natural Gas is the largest system, with 16,463
22

Phase V expansion, once completed, will add approximately 400

Pipeline Group helps customers respond to shifting gas markets.

PORTLAND GENERAL ELECTRIC
In November, Sierra Pacific Resources agreed to purchase
Portland General Electric for $2.1 billion, including $2.02 billion

in cash and the assumption of Enron’s approximately $80 million
merger payment obligation. Sierra Pacific also will assume $1 billion
in PGE debt and preferred stock. The proposed transaction is
expected to conclude in late 2000.
Enron purchased the utility in 1997 to enter the Pacific
Northwest market. Through our association, we successfully
launched a merchant services operation in that region and
acquired Portland General Electric’s communications business,
which became the basis for Enron Broadband Services. The
electricity market has advanced rapidly since that time, and we
can now offer merchant energy services to customers without
owning a regulated electric utility.

TRANSWESTERN PIPELINE

Traditional gas
transportation
offers little
flexibility to
customers.
ENRON ASKS

WHY?

23

STRATEGY: TRANSWESTERN USES ITS EXPERTISE AND ENRON’S TO FAST-TRACK CAPACITY EXPANSION
to California, where natural gas demand is growing rapidly. In response to customers’ reluctance to subscribe
to the new capacity under old scenarios, Transwestern Pipeline develops innovative, flexible products for the
natural gas transportation market.

Planned power plants
Power plants under
development

TRANSWESTERN GAS FLOWS TASK FORCE

TRANSWESTERN OPTIMIZATION TEAM

ENRON COMPRESSION SERVICES

Through its forecast of overall demand and supply of gas
production in the U.S. and Canada, the task force anticipates
that California gas demand will increase by 3.2 percent
annually, mostly due to electric power generation. Customers
want to ship low-cost gas from the San Juan basin in New
Mexico to the California border. They sign commitments to
use the proposed increase in Transwestern’s capacity because
of Transwestern’s ability to offer innovative deal structures
and its bi-directional flexibility to serve both California and
Texas intrastate markets.

Created to increase pipeline capacity through incremental
improvements, the Optimization Team searches for ways to
flow more gas without laying new pipe. To increase capacity
15 percent, Ben Asante, Ron Matthews, Terry Galassini and
Dave Foti conceive an innovative two-step approach. First, the
team will site a new $12 million compressor at Gallup, New
Mexico, to increase pressure at the San Juan junction to 950
psig. Second, it advocates the use of two coolers, at La Plata
and the Blanco Hub, to reduce the gas temperature, allowing
more gas to be compressed through the pipe.

Enron provides compression services at several
pipeline sites throughout North America. Enron will
provide 10,000 shaft horsepower to run the Gallup
compressor. By providing the service at a lower cost
than Transwestern could otherwise obtain, Enron
helps lower the cost of the Gallup expansion.

TRANSWESTERN PIPELINE’S
GALLUP EXPANSION PROJECT
24

The Enron Broadband Services Network

RESULT: TRANSWESTERN INCREASES PIPELINE CAPACITY TO THE CALIFORNIA BORDER WITHOUT LAYING
new pipe — avoiding delay, expense and rights-of-way negotiations. Capacity will increase 15 percent beginning
second quarter 2000, just months after the plan is approved by federal regulators.

Vancouver

Seattle
Tacoma
Portland

Boise

Minneapolis

Boston

Toronto
Detroit

Stamford
New York

Salt Lake City
San Francisco
San Jose

Cheyenne

Chicago

Denver

Cincinnati
St. Louis

Las Vegas

London

Philadelphia
Baltimore
Washington DC

Louisville

Los Angeles

CONTENTS
Charlotte

San Diego

31 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL
CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS

Lubbock

Dallas

Atlanta

37 FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT

Waco
Austin
San Antonio

New Orleans
Houston

POOLING POINTS
DATA CENTERS

39 INFORMATION REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS

Jacksonville

College
Station

39 MANAGEMENT’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR FINANCIAL REPORTING

Orlando
Tampa

40 REPORTS OF INDEPENDENT PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS
41 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
INCOME STATEMENT

Miami

CONNECTIVITY

41 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
42 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
BALANCE SHEET

The Retail Network’s Portfolio of Nationwide Outsourcing Contracts

44 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
45 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
46 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES NOTES TO THE
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
62 SELECTED FINANCIAL AND CREDIT INFORMATION (UNAUDITED)

FINANCIAL REVIEW
ENRON
ENRON
ENGINEERING
ENGINEERING
& CONSTRUCTION
& CONSTRUCTION
COMPANY
COMPANY
Enron Engineering & Construction Company (EE&CC)
is the traditional provider of construction services to
Transwestern. EE&CC’s familiarity with the project and
Transwestern’s system allows it to set an ambitious
schedule of completing construction in just four
months. When completed, the Gallup expansion will
add 50 MMcf/d from the San Juan basin. Overall,
Transwestern’s capacity to the California border is
anticipated to increase by 140 MMcf/d.

TRANSWESTERN GOVERNMENT/REGULATORY AFFAIRS

TRANSWESTERN COMMERCIAL GROUP

Transwestern files its expansion proposal with the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) in May 1999. FERC
approves the proposal in January 2000.

Transwestern creates customized products to meet the
specific needs of its customers. They can purchase capacity
at set prices or index the price of transportation to basin
spreads. For the first time, customers can use a variety of
Transwestern services to mitigate price risk.

ENRON OFFICES
HVAC SERVICE
FACILITY MANAGEMENT
ENERGY SYSTEM DESIGN & INSTALLATION
CUSTOMER SITES

29

30

25

SWEDEN
FINLAND

NORWAY

Nord
Pool
Oslo

Teesside Power & Gas
Processing Plant
1,875 MW
S

60˚N
RUSSIA

Wilton
154 MW

Moscow

Brussels

EEX
Frankfurt CZECH

SWITZERLAND

STORAGE FACILITIES

Nowa Sarzyna 116 MW

ENERGY PARTNERS

AUSTRIA HUNGARY

CHINA

Budapest
Jertovec 240 MW
Bucharest

SLOVENIA CROATIA

Milan

COB
Hub

45˚N

Zagreb

ITALY

Chicago

New York City
Pittsburgh
Charleston, WV

Madrid
Arcos de

Palo
Verde
Hub

SARDINIA

Marmara 478 MW

Sarlux
551 MW

Arcos de la Frontera
1,200 MW

Gaza Power 136 MW

Henry
Hub

New Delhi
QATAR

Dubai

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

MEXICO

Puerto Plata 185 MW
Haina 347 MW

EcoEléctrica 507 MW

JAMAICA

LNG Facility

Kingston
IGL (LPG)

San Juan
Santo
Domingo
Guatemala City
Bahía Las Minas
NICARAGUA
Puerto Quetzal
355 MW
Bachaquero III
Corinto
110 MW
70.5 MW Managua
124 MW
Caracas
GUATEMALA

PANAMÁ

Panamá City

Progasco

Bogotá

Abu Dhabi
480,000 tons
LNG Export
Oman
1.6 MM tons
LNG Export

San Juan Gas LDC
José LNG
Accroven LPG

NIGERIA

Lagos State Power Project
548 MW
90MW

Ventane LPG
Calife LDC

Chengdu
Cogen
284 MW

1000 – 2000

Seoul
Tokyo

0 – 1000

30˚N

SK-Enron
Gas Distribution
LPG Import

Wuhan Loop

PROJECTS OR GENERATION ASSETS IN OPERATION
POWER PLANT

Sichuan-Wuhan
Natural Gas Pipeline

ENRON-OWNED PIPELINE
Hanoi

India E&P
Mumbai

Subic Bay 116 MW

THAILAND

Manila

Bangkok

PHILIPPINES

LEASED PIPELINE CAPACITY

GUAM

Hainan Island
160 MW

VIETNAM

Anigua
Piti 80 MW

Batangas110 MW

OTHER

15˚N

LPG FACILITY
E&P
GAS DISTRIBUTION

Malaysia
2.6 MM tons
LNG Export

Benin Integrated
Gas & Power Project
80 MW
20 miles

Centragas
357 miles
Promigas
1,062 miles

INDIA

Dabhol
826 MW
1,624 MW
LNG Import
Dabhol-Talasari
Pipeline

ProCaribe

VENEZUELA
COLOMBIA

U.A.E.
Project Dolphin
3 Bcf/d
Muscat Gas OMAN
Distribution

PUERTO RICO

SOUTH KOREA

Qinghai-Lanzhou
Natural Gas Pipeline

Houston

Mexico City

2000 – 3000

Beijing

TURKEY

Entergy
Hub

Monterrey

DAILY ENERGY MARKETING ACTIVITY (BBTUE/D)
3000 +

SPAIN

Cinergy
Hub

Denver
San Francisco

Zurich

Toronto

Warsaw

POLAND

BELGIUM

FRANCE

ELECTRIC GRID
GAS PROCESSING PLANTS

Amsterdam
APX GERMANY

London

TRADING EXCHANGE

DENMARK

NETHERLANDS

Sutton Bridge Power
790 MW IRELAND
Oxford
London

Portland

ENRON WHOLESALE OFFICES

Stockholm

Stockholm

U. K.

Calgary

Helsinki

Oslo

First Gas Power Co. Fuel Supply
30-35,000 Bbls/d

ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION

SINGAPORE

0˚
PROJECTS OR GENERATION ASSETS IN CONSTRUCTION
OR COMMISSION
Jakarta

Gaspart Northeast 5 LDCs

POWER PLANT

BRAZIL
INDONESIA

Pantanal Energía
150 MW
330 MW

BOLIVIA

Santa Cruz

PIPELINE

Salvador

15˚S

LPG FACILITY

Cuiabá Pipeline 385 miles
Transredes
3,093 miles
Bolivia to Brazil Pipeline
1,864 miles

CEG/CEG
Rio LDCs
Gaspart South
2 LDCs
Rio de Janeiro
São Paulo
Elektro Eletricidade
e Serviços

h

LNG FACILITY

Pande Gas Project 378 miles
MOZAMBIQUE
AUSTRALIA

Johannesburg
SOUTH AFRICA

Maputo
Maputo Iron & Steel Project Integrated
Steel Slab Manufacturing Facility 2x2 MTPY

PROJECTS OR GENERATION ASSETS IN DEVELOPMENT

30˚S

POWER PLANT
PIPELINE

ARGENTINA

Buenos Aires

OTHER

Sydney

GAS DISTRIBUTION
LPG FACILITY
LNG FACILITY
Transportadora de Gas del Sur
4,104 miles

LNG VESSEL

45˚S

A GLOBAL LOOK AT ENRON
26

OTHER

SWEDEN
FINLAND

NORWAY

Nord
Pool
Oslo

Teesside Power & Gas
Processing Plant
1,875 MW
S

60˚N
RUSSIA

Wilton
154 MW

Moscow

Brussels

EEX
Frankfurt CZECH

SWITZERLAND

STORAGE FACILITIES

Nowa Sarzyna 116 MW

ENERGY PARTNERS

AUSTRIA HUNGARY

CHINA

Budapest
Jertovec 240 MW
Bucharest

SLOVENIA CROATIA

Milan

COB
Hub

45˚N

Zagreb

ITALY

Chicago

New York City
Pittsburgh
Charleston, WV

Madrid
Arcos de

Palo
Verde
Hub

SARDINIA

Marmara 478 MW

Sarlux
551 MW

Arcos de la Frontera
1,200 MW

Gaza Power 136 MW

Henry
Hub

New Delhi
QATAR

Dubai

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

MEXICO

Puerto Plata 185 MW
Haina 347 MW

EcoEléctrica 507 MW

JAMAICA

LNG Facility

Kingston
IGL (LPG)

San Juan
Santo
Domingo
Guatemala City
Bahía Las Minas
NICARAGUA
Puerto Quetzal
355 MW
Bachaquero III
Corinto
110 MW
70.5 MW Managua
124 MW
Caracas
GUATEMALA

PANAMÁ

Panamá City

Progasco

Bogotá

Abu Dhabi
480,000 tons
LNG Export
Oman
1.6 MM tons
LNG Export

San Juan Gas LDC
José LNG
Accroven LPG

NIGERIA

Lagos State Power Project
548 MW
90MW

Ventane LPG
Calife LDC

Chengdu
Cogen
284 MW

1000 – 2000

Seoul
Tokyo

0 – 1000

30˚N

SK-Enron
Gas Distribution
LPG Import

Wuhan Loop

PROJECTS OR GENERATION ASSETS IN OPERATION
POWER PLANT

Sichuan-Wuhan
Natural Gas Pipeline

ENRON-OWNED PIPELINE
Hanoi

India E&P
Mumbai

Subic Bay 116 MW

THAILAND

Manila

Bangkok

PHILIPPINES

LEASED PIPELINE CAPACITY

GUAM

Hainan Island
160 MW

VIETNAM

Anigua
Piti 80 MW

Batangas110 MW

OTHER

15˚N

LPG FACILITY
E&P
GAS DISTRIBUTION

Malaysia
2.6 MM tons
LNG Export

Benin Integrated
Gas & Power Project
80 MW
20 miles

Centragas
357 miles
Promigas
1,062 miles

INDIA

Dabhol
826 MW
1,624 MW
LNG Import
Dabhol-Talasari
Pipeline

ProCaribe

VENEZUELA
COLOMBIA

U.A.E.
Project Dolphin
3 Bcf/d
Muscat Gas OMAN
Distribution

PUERTO RICO

SOUTH KOREA

Qinghai-Lanzhou
Natural Gas Pipeline

Houston

Mexico City

2000 – 3000

Beijing

TURKEY

Entergy
Hub

Monterrey

DAILY ENERGY MARKETING ACTIVITY (BBTUE/D)
3000 +

SPAIN

Cinergy
Hub

Denver
San Francisco

Zurich

Toronto

Warsaw

POLAND

BELGIUM

FRANCE

ELECTRIC GRID
GAS PROCESSING PLANTS

Amsterdam
APX GERMANY

London

TRADING EXCHANGE

DENMARK

NETHERLANDS

Sutton Bridge Power
790 MW IRELAND
Oxford
London

Portland

ENRON WHOLESALE OFFICES

Stockholm

Stockholm

U. K.

Calgary

Helsinki

Oslo

First Gas Power Co. Fuel Supply
30-35,000 Bbls/d

ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION

SINGAPORE

0˚
PROJECTS OR GENERATION ASSETS IN CONSTRUCTION
OR COMMISSION
Jakarta

Gaspart Northeast 5 LDCs

POWER PLANT

BRAZIL
INDONESIA

Pantanal Energía
150 MW
330 MW

BOLIVIA

Santa Cruz

PIPELINE

Salvador

15˚S

LPG FACILITY

Cuiabá Pipeline 385 miles
Transredes
3,093 miles
Bolivia to Brazil Pipeline
1,864 miles

CEG/CEG
Rio LDCs
Gaspart South
2 LDCs
Rio de Janeiro
São Paulo
Elektro Eletricidade
e Serviços

h

LNG FACILITY

Pande Gas Project 378 miles
MOZAMBIQUE
AUSTRALIA

Johannesburg
SOUTH AFRICA

Maputo
Maputo Iron & Steel Project Integrated
Steel Slab Manufacturing Facility 2x2 MTPY

PROJECTS OR GENERATION ASSETS IN DEVELOPMENT

30˚S

POWER PLANT
PIPELINE

ARGENTINA

Buenos Aires

OTHER

Sydney

GAS DISTRIBUTION
LPG FACILITY
LNG FACILITY
Transportadora de Gas del Sur
4,104 miles

LNG VESSEL

45˚S

A GLOBAL LOOK AT ENRON
26

OTHER

SWEDEN
FINLAND

NORWAY

Nord
Pool
Oslo

Teesside Power & Gas
Processing Plant
1,875 MW
S

60˚N
RUSSIA

Wilton
154 MW

Moscow

Brussels

EEX
Frankfurt CZECH

SWITZERLAND

STORAGE FACILITIES

Nowa Sarzyna 116 MW

ENERGY PARTNERS

AUSTRIA HUNGARY

CHINA

Budapest
Jertovec 240 MW
Bucharest

SLOVENIA CROATIA

Milan

COB
Hub

45˚N

Zagreb

ITALY

Chicago

New York City
Pittsburgh
Charleston, WV

Madrid
Arcos de

Palo
Verde
Hub

SARDINIA

Marmara 478 MW

Sarlux
551 MW

Arcos de la Frontera
1,200 MW

Gaza Power 136 MW

Henry
Hub

New Delhi
QATAR

Dubai

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

MEXICO

Puerto Plata 185 MW
Haina 347 MW

EcoEléctrica 507 MW

JAMAICA

LNG Facility

Kingston
IGL (LPG)

San Juan
Santo
Domingo
Guatemala City
Bahía Las Minas
NICARAGUA
Puerto Quetzal
355 MW
Bachaquero III
Corinto
110 MW
70.5 MW Managua
124 MW
Caracas
GUATEMALA

PANAMÁ

Panamá City

Progasco

Bogotá

Abu Dhabi
480,000 tons
LNG Export
Oman
1.6 MM tons
LNG Export

San Juan Gas LDC
José LNG
Accroven LPG

NIGERIA

Lagos State Power Project
548 MW
90MW

Ventane LPG
Calife LDC

Chengdu
Cogen
284 MW

1000 – 2000

Seoul
Tokyo

0 – 1000

30˚N

SK-Enron
Gas Distribution
LPG Import

Wuhan Loop

PROJECTS OR GENERATION ASSETS IN OPERATION
POWER PLANT

Sichuan-Wuhan
Natural Gas Pipeline

ENRON-OWNED PIPELINE
Hanoi

India E&P
Mumbai

Subic Bay 116 MW

THAILAND

Manila

Bangkok

PHILIPPINES

LEASED PIPELINE CAPACITY

GUAM

Hainan Island
160 MW

VIETNAM

Anigua
Piti 80 MW

Batangas110 MW

OTHER

15˚N

LPG FACILITY
E&P
GAS DISTRIBUTION

Malaysia
2.6 MM tons
LNG Export

Benin Integrated
Gas & Power Project
80 MW
20 miles

Centragas
357 miles
Promigas
1,062 miles

INDIA

Dabhol
826 MW
1,624 MW
LNG Import
Dabhol-Talasari
Pipeline

ProCaribe

VENEZUELA
COLOMBIA

U.A.E.
Project Dolphin
3 Bcf/d
Muscat Gas OMAN
Distribution

PUERTO RICO

SOUTH KOREA

Qinghai-Lanzhou
Natural Gas Pipeline

Houston

Mexico City

2000 – 3000

Beijing

TURKEY

Entergy
Hub

Monterrey

DAILY ENERGY MARKETING ACTIVITY (BBTUE/D)
3000 +

SPAIN

Cinergy
Hub

Denver
San Francisco

Zurich

Toronto

Warsaw

POLAND

BELGIUM

FRANCE

ELECTRIC GRID
GAS PROCESSING PLANTS

Amsterdam
APX GERMANY

London

TRADING EXCHANGE

DENMARK

NETHERLANDS

Sutton Bridge Power
790 MW IRELAND
Oxford
London

Portland

ENRON WHOLESALE OFFICES

Stockholm

Stockholm

U. K.

Calgary

Helsinki

Oslo

First Gas Power Co. Fuel Supply
30-35,000 Bbls/d

ELECTRICITY DISTRIBUTION

SINGAPORE

0˚
PROJECTS OR GENERATION ASSETS IN CONSTRUCTION
OR COMMISSION
Jakarta

Gaspart Northeast 5 LDCs

POWER PLANT

BRAZIL
INDONESIA

Pantanal Energía
150 MW
330 MW

BOLIVIA

Santa Cruz

PIPELINE

Salvador

15˚S

LPG FACILITY

Cuiabá Pipeline 385 miles
Transredes
3,093 miles
Bolivia to Brazil Pipeline
1,864 miles

CEG/CEG
Rio LDCs
Gaspart South
2 LDCs
Rio de Janeiro
São Paulo
Elektro Eletricidade
e Serviços

h

LNG FACILITY

Pande Gas Project 378 miles
MOZAMBIQUE
AUSTRALIA

Johannesburg
SOUTH AFRICA

Maputo
Maputo Iron & Steel Project Integrated
Steel Slab Manufacturing Facility 2x2 MTPY

PROJECTS OR GENERATION ASSETS IN DEVELOPMENT

30˚S

POWER PLANT
PIPELINE

ARGENTINA

Buenos Aires

OTHER

Sydney

GAS DISTRIBUTION
LPG FACILITY
LNG FACILITY
Transportadora de Gas del Sur
4,104 miles

LNG VESSEL

45˚S

A GLOBAL LOOK AT ENRON
26

OTHER

The Enron Broadband Services Network

RESULT: TRANSWESTERN INCREASES PIPELINE CAPACITY TO THE CALIFORNIA BORDER WITHOUT LAYING
new pipe — avoiding delay, expense and rights-of-way negotiations. Capacity will increase 15 percent beginning
second quarter 2000, just months after the plan is approved by federal regulators.

Vancouver

Seattle
Tacoma
Portland

Boise

Minneapolis

Boston

Toronto
Detroit

Stamford
New York

Salt Lake City
San Francisco
San Jose

Cheyenne

Chicago

Denver

Cincinnati
St. Louis

Las Vegas

London

Philadelphia
Baltimore
Washington DC

Louisville

Los Angeles

CONTENTS
Charlotte

San Diego

31 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL
CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS

Lubbock

Dallas

Atlanta

37 FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT

Waco
Austin
San Antonio

New Orleans
Houston

POOLING POINTS
DATA CENTERS

39 INFORMATION REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS

Jacksonville

College
Station

39 MANAGEMENT’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR FINANCIAL REPORTING

Orlando
Tampa

40 REPORTS OF INDEPENDENT PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS
41 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
INCOME STATEMENT

Miami

CONNECTIVITY

41 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
42 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
BALANCE SHEET

The Retail Network’s Portfolio of Nationwide Outsourcing Contracts

44 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
45 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
46 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES NOTES TO THE
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
62 SELECTED FINANCIAL AND CREDIT INFORMATION (UNAUDITED)

FINANCIAL REVIEW
ENRON
ENRON
ENGINEERING
ENGINEERING
& CONSTRUCTION
& CONSTRUCTION
COMPANY
COMPANY
Enron Engineering & Construction Company (EE&CC)
is the traditional provider of construction services to
Transwestern. EE&CC’s familiarity with the project and
Transwestern’s system allows it to set an ambitious
schedule of completing construction in just four
months. When completed, the Gallup expansion will
add 50 MMcf/d from the San Juan basin. Overall,
Transwestern’s capacity to the California border is
anticipated to increase by 140 MMcf/d.

TRANSWESTERN GOVERNMENT/REGULATORY AFFAIRS

TRANSWESTERN COMMERCIAL GROUP

Transwestern files its expansion proposal with the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) in May 1999. FERC
approves the proposal in January 2000.

Transwestern creates customized products to meet the
specific needs of its customers. They can purchase capacity
at set prices or index the price of transportation to basin
spreads. For the first time, customers can use a variety of
Transwestern services to mitigate price risk.

ENRON OFFICES
HVAC SERVICE
FACILITY MANAGEMENT
ENERGY SYSTEM DESIGN & INSTALLATION
CUSTOMER SITES

29

30

25

The Enron Broadband Services Network

RESULT: TRANSWESTERN INCREASES PIPELINE CAPACITY TO THE CALIFORNIA BORDER WITHOUT LAYING
new pipe — avoiding delay, expense and rights-of-way negotiations. Capacity will increase 15 percent beginning
second quarter 2000, just months after the plan is approved by federal regulators.

Vancouver

Seattle
Tacoma
Portland

Boise

Minneapolis

Boston

Toronto
Detroit

Stamford
New York

Salt Lake City
San Francisco
San Jose

Cheyenne

Chicago

Denver

Cincinnati
St. Louis

Las Vegas

London

Philadelphia
Baltimore
Washington DC

Louisville

Los Angeles

CONTENTS
Charlotte

San Diego

31 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL
CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS

Lubbock

Dallas

Atlanta

37 FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT

Waco
Austin
San Antonio

New Orleans
Houston

POOLING POINTS
DATA CENTERS

39 INFORMATION REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS

Jacksonville

College
Station

39 MANAGEMENT’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR FINANCIAL REPORTING

Orlando
Tampa

40 REPORTS OF INDEPENDENT PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS
41 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
INCOME STATEMENT

Miami

CONNECTIVITY

41 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
42 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
BALANCE SHEET

The Retail Network’s Portfolio of Nationwide Outsourcing Contracts

44 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
45 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES CONSOLIDATED
STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
46 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES NOTES TO THE
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
62 SELECTED FINANCIAL AND CREDIT INFORMATION (UNAUDITED)

FINANCIAL REVIEW
ENRON
ENRON
ENGINEERING
ENGINEERING
& CONSTRUCTION
& CONSTRUCTION
COMPANY
COMPANY
Enron Engineering & Construction Company (EE&CC)
is the traditional provider of construction services to
Transwestern. EE&CC’s familiarity with the project and
Transwestern’s system allows it to set an ambitious
schedule of completing construction in just four
months. When completed, the Gallup expansion will
add 50 MMcf/d from the San Juan basin. Overall,
Transwestern’s capacity to the California border is
anticipated to increase by 140 MMcf/d.

TRANSWESTERN GOVERNMENT/REGULATORY AFFAIRS

TRANSWESTERN COMMERCIAL GROUP

Transwestern files its expansion proposal with the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) in May 1999. FERC
approves the proposal in January 2000.

Transwestern creates customized products to meet the
specific needs of its customers. They can purchase capacity
at set prices or index the price of transportation to basin
spreads. For the first time, customers can use a variety of
Transwestern services to mitigate price risk.

ENRON OFFICES
HVAC SERVICE
FACILITY MANAGEMENT
ENERGY SYSTEM DESIGN & INSTALLATION
CUSTOMER SITES

29

30

25

Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations

Income Before Interest, Minority Interests and Income Taxes

The following review of the results of operations and financial
condition of Enron Corp. and its subsidiaries and affiliates (Enron) should
be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements.

RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated Net Income
Enron’s net income for 1999 was $893 million compared to $703
million in 1998 and $105 million in 1997. Enron’s operating segments
include Transportation and Distribution (Gas Pipeline Group and Portland
General), Wholesale Energy Operations and Services (Enron’s North
America, Europe and international energy businesses and Enron Broadband
Services), Retail Energy Services (Enron Energy Services), Exploration and
Production (Enron Oil & Gas Company) through August 16, 1999 (see Note
2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements), and Corporate and Other,
which includes certain other businesses. Net income includes the following:
(In millions)
After-tax results before items impacting
comparability
Items impacting comparability:(a)
Gains on sales of subsidiary stock
Charge to reflect impairment of
MTBE assets
Charges to reflect losses on
contracted MTBE production
Charge to reflect impact of amended
J-Block gas contract
Gains on sales of liquids and
gathering assets
Cumulative effect of accounting changes
Net income

(In millions)
Transportation and Distribution:
Gas Pipeline Group
Portland General
Wholesale Energy Operations and Services
Retail Energy Services
Exploration and Production
Corporate and Other
Income before interest, minority
interests and taxes

1999

1998

1997

$ 380
305
1,317
(68)
65
(4)

$ 351
286
968
(119)
128
(32)

$ 466
114
654
(107)
183
(745)

$1,995

$1,582

$ 565

Transportation and Distribution

1999

1998

1997

$ 957

$ 698

$ 515

Transportation and Distribution consists of Enron’s Gas Pipeline
Group and Portland General. The Gas Pipeline Group includes Enron’s
interstate natural gas pipelines, primarily Northern Natural Gas
Company (Northern), Transwestern Pipeline Company (Transwestern),
Enron’s 50% interest in Florida Gas Transmission Company (Florida Gas)
and Enron’s interests in Northern Border Pipeline and EOTT Energy
Partners, L.P. (EOTT).

345

45

61

Gas Pipeline Group. The following table summarizes total volumes
transported by each of Enron’s interstate natural gas pipelines.

(278)

-

-

-

(40)

(74)

-

-

(463)

(131)
$ 893

$ 703

66
$ 105

(a) Tax affected at 35%, except where a specific tax rate applied.

Total volumes transported (BBtu/d)(a)
Northern Natural Gas
Transwestern Pipeline
Florida Gas Transmission
Northern Border Pipeline

1999

1998

1997

3,820
1,462
1,495
2,405

4,098
1,608
1,324
1,770

4,364
1,416
1,341
1,800

(a) Billion British thermal units per day. Amounts reflect 100% of each entity’s throughput
volumes. Florida Gas and Northern Border Pipeline are unconsolidated equity affiliates.

Significant components of IBIT are as follows:

Diluted earnings per share of common stock were as follows:

Diluted earnings per share(a):
After-tax results before items
impacting comparability
Items impacting comparability:
Gains on sales of subsidiary stock
Charge to reflect impairment of
MTBE assets
Charges to reflect losses on
contracted MTBE production
Charge to reflect impact of
amended J-Block gas contract
Gains on sales of liquids and
gathering assets
Cumulative effect of accounting changes
Effect of anti-dilution(b)
Diluted earnings per share

The following table presents income before interest, minority interests
and income taxes (IBIT) for each of Enron’s operating segments (see Note
20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements):

1999

1998

1997

$1.18

$1.00

$0.87

0.45

0.07

0.11

(0.36)

-

-

-

(0.06)

(0.13)

-

-

(0.78)

(0.17)
$1.10

$1.01

0.11
(0.02)
$0.16

(In millions)
Net revenues
Operating expenses
Depreciation and amortization
Equity earnings
Other income, net
IBIT before items impacting comparability
Gains on sales of liquids and gathering assets
Income before interest and taxes

1999
$626
264
66
38
46
380
$380

1998
$640
276
70
32
25
351
$351

1997
$665
310
69
40
38
364
102
$466

Net Revenues

(a) Restated to reflect the two-for-one stock split effective August 13, 1999.
(b) For 1997, the conversion of preferred shares to common shares for purposes of the diluted earnings per share calculation was anti-dilutive by $0.02 per share. However, in order
to present comparable results, per share amounts for each earnings component were
calculated using 592 million shares, which assumes the conversion of preferred shares to
common shares.

Revenues, net of cost of sales, of Gas Pipeline Group declined $14
million (2%) during 1999 and $25 million (4%) during 1998 as compared
to the applicable preceding year. The decrease in net revenue in 1999
compared to 1998 was primarily a result of the expiration, in October
1998, of certain transition cost recovery surcharges, partially offset by a
sale in 1999 of gas from Northern’s gas storage inventory. The decrease
in net revenue in 1998 compared to 1997 was primarily due to the
warmer than normal winter in Northern’s service territory and the
reduction of transition costs recovered through a regulatory surcharge
at Northern.

31

Statistics for Portland General are as follows:

Operating Expenses
Operating expenses, including depreciation and amortization, of
Gas Pipeline Group declined $16 million (5%) during 1999 primarily as a
result of the expiration of certain transition cost recovery surcharges.
Operating expenses decreased $33 million (9%) during 1998 primarily
as a result of the reduction of transition costs at Northern and lower
overhead costs.

Equity Earnings
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated equity affiliates increased $6
million in 1999 after decreasing $8 million during 1998 as compared to
1997. The increase in earnings in 1999 as compared to 1998 was primarily a result of higher earnings from Northern Border Pipeline and EOTT
reflecting Northern Border Pipeline’s expansion project and greater volumes transported by EOTT due to acquisitions made during the last year.
The decrease during 1998 as compared to 1997 was primarily due to
higher 1997 earnings from Citrus Corp. (Citrus), which holds Enron’s 50%
interest in Florida Gas. Earnings from Citrus were higher in 1997 due to
a contract restructuring.

Other Income, Net
Other income, net increased $21 million in 1999 as compared to
1998 after decreasing $13 million in 1998 as compared to 1997. Included
in 1999 was interest income earned in connection with the financing of
an acquisition by EOTT, while the 1998 amount included gains of $21
million recognized from the sale of an interest in an equity investment,
substantially offset by charges related to litigation.
Portland General. Results for Portland General have been included
in Enron’s Consolidated Financial Statements beginning July 1, 1997.
Since that date, Portland General realized IBIT as follows:
(In millions)
Revenues
Purchased power and fuel
Operating expenses
Depreciation and amortization
Other income, net
Income before interest and taxes

1999
$1,379
639
304
181
50
$ 305

1998
$1,196
451
295
183
19
$ 286

1997(a)
$746
389
154
91
2
$114

(a) Represents the period from July 1, 1997 through December 31, 1997.

Revenues and purchased power and fuel costs increased $183 million and $188 million, respectively, in 1999 as compared to 1998.
Revenues increased primarily as a result of an increase in the number of
customers served by Portland General. Higher purchased power and fuel
costs, which increased 42% in 1999, offset the increase in revenues.
Other income, net increased $31 million in 1999 as compared to 1998
primarily as a result of a gain recognized on the sale of certain assets.
The 1998 results were impacted by a warmer than normal winter
and the transfer of the majority of Portland General’s electricity wholesale business to the Enron Wholesale segment, partially offset by an
increase in sales to retail customers.

Electricity sales (thousand MWh)(b)
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Total retail
Wholesale
Total electricity sales

1999

1998

7,404
7,392
4,463
19,259
12,612
31,871

7,101
6,781
3,562
17,444
10,869
28,313

1997(a)
3,379
3,618
2,166
9,163
13,448
22,611

Resource mix
Coal
Combustion turbine
Hydro
Total generation
Firm purchases
Secondary purchases
Total resources

15%
8
9
32
57
11
100%

16%
12
9
37
56
7
100%

10%
5
5
20
74
6
100%

Average variable power cost (Mills/KWh)(c)
Generation
Firm purchases
Secondary purchases
Total average variable power cost

9.8
23.2
19.7
19.5

8.6
17.3
23.6
15.6

8.7
18.9
13.2
17.2

Retail customers (end of period, thousands)

719

704

685

(a) Represents the period from July 1,1997 through December 31, 1997.
(b) Thousand megawatt-hours.
(c) Mills (1/10 cent) per kilowatt-hour.

Outlook
The Gas Pipeline Group should continue to provide stable earnings
and cash flows during 2000, including steady growth over 1999 levels.
Low operating costs, competitive rates and continued expansion opportunities enable the Gas Pipeline Group to continue to be a strong, efficient competitor in all markets. Transwestern will bring 140 MMcf/d of
additional supply from the San Juan Basin and West Texas into California
in 2000. Florida Gas is currently the only major pipeline serving the
rapidly growing peninsular Florida market where the demand for power
is expected to continue to increase. Florida Gas is seeking approval from
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) to implement two
expansions over the next two years and is expected to seek approval
from the FERC for a third expansion in the near future, which will
increase its capacity by 950 MMcf/d to meet the expected increase in natural gas demand by power plants. Northern Border Pipeline is seeking
approval from the FERC for its 545 MMcf/d expansion into Indiana which
is to be completed and in service within the next year.
On November 8, 1999, Enron announced that it had entered into an
agreement to sell Portland General to Sierra Pacific Resources. The proposed transaction, which is subject to regulatory approval, is expected to
close in late 2000. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.

Wholesale Energy Operations and Services
Enron’s wholesale business (Enron Wholesale) includes its wholesale energy businesses around the world, as well as its emerging broadband services business. Enron Wholesale operates in developed markets
such as North America and Europe, as well as developing or newly
deregulating markets including South America, India and Japan.
Enron builds its wholesale businesses through the creation of networks involving asset ownership, contractual access to third-party assets
and market-making activities. Each market in which Enron Wholesale
operates utilizes these components in a slightly different manner and is

32

at a different stage of development. This network strategy has enabled
Enron Wholesale to establish a leading position in its markets. These
activities are categorized into two business lines: (a) Commodity Sales
and Services and (b) Assets and Investments. Often these activities are
integrated into a bundled product offering for Enron’s customers.
Enron Wholesale manages its portfolio of contracts and assets in
order to maximize value, minimize the associated risks and provide overall liquidity. In doing so, Enron Wholesale uses portfolio and risk management disciplines, including offsetting or hedging transactions, to manage exposures to market price movements (commodities, interest rates,
foreign currencies and equities). Additionally, Enron Wholesale manages
its liquidity and exposure to third-party credit risk through monetization
of its contract portfolio or third-party insurance contracts. Enron
Wholesale also sells interests in certain investments and other assets to
improve liquidity and overall return.
The following table reflects IBIT for each business line:
(In millions)
Commodity sales and services
Assets and investments
Unallocated expenses
Income before interest,
minority interests and taxes

1999
$ 628
850
(161)

1998
$411
709
(152)

1997
$249
565
(160)

$1,317

$968

$654

The following discussion analyzes the contributions to IBIT for each
business line.
Commodity Sales and Services. Enron Wholesale provides reliable
commodity delivery and predictable pricing to its customers through forward contracts. This market-making activity includes the purchase, sale,
marketing and delivery of natural gas, electricity, liquids and other commodities, as well as the management of Enron Wholesale’s own portfolio of contracts. Enron Wholesale’s market-making activity is facilitated
through a network of capabilities including asset ownership.
Accordingly, certain assets involved in the delivery of these services are
included in this business (such as intrastate natural gas pipelines, power
plants and gas storage facilities).
Enron Wholesale markets, transports and provides energy commodities as reflected in the following table (including intercompany amounts):

Physical volumes (BBtue/d)(a)(b)
Gas:
United States
Canada
Europe
Other
Transport volumes
Total gas volumes
Crude oil
Liquids
Electricity(c)
Total physical volumes (BBtue/d)
Electricity volumes marketed
(thousand MWh)
United States
Europe
Other
Total
Financial settlements (notional, BBtue/d)

1999

1998

1997

8,982
4,398
1,549
23
14,952
575
15,527
5,407
753
10,742
32,429

7,418
3,486
1,243
8
12,155
559
12,714
2,960
610
11,024
27,308

7,654
2,263
660
10,577
460
11,037
690
987
5,256
17,970

380,518
11,143
433
392,094
99,337

401,843
483
46
402,372
75,266

191,746
100
191,846
49,082

(a) Billion British thermal units equivalent per day.
(b) Includes third-party transactions by Enron Energy Services.
(c) Represents electricity volumes marketed, converted to BBtue/d.

Earnings from commodity sales and services increased $217 million
(53%) in 1999 as compared to 1998 reflecting strong results from the
intermediation businesses in both North America and Europe, which
include delivery of energy commodities and associated risk management
products. Enron Wholesale strengthened its market share leadership
position in the North American energy markets and continued to expand
its presence in Europe, particularly on the Continent where wholesale
markets began deregulation in early 1999. Enron Wholesale also successfully managed its overall portfolio of contracts, particularly in minimizing
credit exposures utilizing third-party contracts. New product offerings in
coal and pulp and paper markets also added favorably to the results. In
late 1999, Enron Wholesale launched an Internet-based eCommerce system, EnronOnline, which allows wholesale customers to view Enron’s real
time pricing and to complete commodity transactions with Enron as principal, with no direct interaction. This capability has positively impacted
transaction levels.
The earnings from commodity sales and services operations
increased 65% in 1998 as compared to 1997, reflecting growing transaction levels during the period. Sales in North America increased significantly due to increased power marketing activities (over 100% increase
in volumes), along with new and restructured long-term contracts.
European activity declined during the year, primarily reflecting the
effect of regulatory actions in the United Kingdom that impacted the
market for natural gas.
Assets and Investments. Enron’s Wholesale businesses make investments in various energy and communications-related assets as a part of
its network strategy. Enron Wholesale either purchases the asset from a
third party or develops and constructs the asset. In most cases, Enron
Wholesale operates and manages such assets. Earnings from these
investments principally result from operations of the assets or sales of
ownership interests.
Additionally, Enron Wholesale invests in debt and equity securities
of energy and communications-related businesses, which may also utilize Enron Wholesale’s products and services. With these merchant
investments, Enron’s influence is much more limited relative to assets
Enron develops or constructs. Earnings from these activities result from
changes in the market value of the security. See Note 4 to the
Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of these investments.
Earnings from assets and investments increased $141 million (20%)
in 1999 as compared to 1998. During 1999, earnings from Enron
Wholesale’s energy-related assets increased, reflecting the operation of
the Dabhol Power Plant in India, ownership in Elektro Eletricidade e
Serviços S.A. (Elektro), a Brazilian electric utility (see Note 2 to the
Consolidated Financial Statements) and assets in various other developing markets. Enron Wholesale’s merchant investments increased in value
during the year due to the expansion into certain communications
investments, partially offset by a decline in the value of certain energy
investments. In addition, Enron Wholesale’s 1999 earnings increased due
to activities related to building and optimizing its broadband fiber network, while gains on sales of energy assets declined.
Earnings from assets and investments increased 25% in 1998 as
compared to 1997. This increase reflects earnings from the sale of interests in certain energy assets including power projects in Puerto Rico,
Turkey, Italy and the United Kingdom, from which Enron Wholesale realized the value created during the development and construction phases.
Increased development costs in emerging markets and lower earnings
from merchant investments partially offset such increase. Some of these
transactions involved securitizations in which Enron retained certain
interests associated with the underlying assets.
Unallocated Expenses. Net unallocated expenses include rent, systems
expenses and other support group costs.

33

Outlook
Enron Wholesale plans to continue to expand its networks in each
of its key energy markets, as well as the market for broadband services.
Worldwide energy markets continue to grow as governments implement deregulation or privatization plans. The market for broadband services is expected to increase significantly as demand increases for high
bandwidth applications such as video. Enron will continue to purchase
or develop selected assets to expand its networks, as well as grow its
portfolio of contracts providing access to third-party assets. The combination of growing markets and Enron Wholesale’s highly developed
market-making skills should continue to enhance market opportunities
globally for Enron over the next several years.
As a result, Enron anticipates continued growth in Enron Wholesale
during 2000. In the commodity sales and services business, volumes are
expected to continue to increase as Enron Wholesale increases its transaction volume in the growing unregulated U.S. power market and in the
rapidly expanding European gas and power markets. In addition,
EnronOnline is expected to significantly add to transaction volume and
profit opportunities in the coming year. In the assets and investments
business, Enron Wholesale expects to continue to benefit from opportunities related to its assets and investments, including sales or restructurings of appreciated investments, and in providing capital to energyintensive customers. Equity earnings from operations are expected to
increase as a result of commencement of commercial operations of new
power plants and pipeline projects in early 2000. At December 31, 1999,
Enron Wholesale’s domestic and international projects under construction included approximately 2,300 miles of pipelines and eleven power
plants with a combined capacity of approximately 5,700 megawatts, in
which Enron owns various interests.
Earnings from Enron Wholesale are dependent on the origination
and completion of transactions, some of which are individually significant and which are impacted by market conditions, the regulatory environment and customer relationships. Enron Wholesale’s transactions
have historically been based on a diverse product portfolio, providing a
solid base of earnings. Enron’s strengths, including its ability to identify
and respond to customer needs, access to extensive physical assets and
its integrated product offerings, are important drivers of the expected
continued earnings growth. In addition, significant earnings are expected from Enron Wholesale’s commodity portfolio and investments, which
are subject to market fluctuations. External factors, such as the amount
of volatility in market prices, impact the earnings opportunity associated with Enron Wholesale’s business. Risk related to these activities is
managed using naturally offsetting transactions and hedge transactions.
The effectiveness of Enron’s risk management activities can have a material impact on future earnings. See “Financial Risk Management” for a
discussion of market risk related to Enron Wholesale.

Retail Energy Services
Enron Energy Services (Energy Services) is extending Enron’s energy
expertise and capabilities to end-use retail customers in the industrial
and commercial business sectors to manage their energy requirements
and reduce total energy costs. During 1999, Energy Services continued to
expand its presence in the United States and entered the international
market by setting up operations in Europe and establishing organizations in South America, Mexico and Canada.
Energy Services provides natural gas, electricity, liquids and other
commodities to industrial and commercial customers located throughout the United States and the United Kingdom. In deregulated locations,
Energy Services may either supply commodities directly to its customers
or have the local utilities supply customers in a manner similar to regulated locations. Energy Services also provides outsourcing solutions to

34

customers for full energy management. This integrated product includes
the management of commodity delivery, energy information and energy
assets, and may include price risk management activities.
Energy Services recognized losses before interest, minority interests
and taxes of $68 million, $119 million and $107 million for 1999, 1998
and 1997, respectively. The results primarily reflect the costs associated
with developing the commodity, capital and services capability to deliver
on contracts signed to date. These costs were partially offset by increased
earnings from higher gas and power sales in 1999 resulting from the
origination of new contracts and from outsourcing contracts for energy
management services signed in 1999.

Outlook
During 2000, Energy Services anticipates continued growth in the
demand for retail energy outsourcing solutions, both domestically and
internationally. Energy Services will deliver these services to its existing
customers, while continuing to expand its commercial and industrial customer base for total energy outsourcing. Energy Services also plans to
continue integrating its service delivery capabilities, focusing on the
development of best practices, nationwide procurement opportunities
and efficient use of capital.

Exploration and Production
Enron’s exploration and production operations have been conducted by Enron Oil & Gas Company (EOG). The operating results of this segment reflect activity through August 16, 1999, the date of the share
exchange transaction with EOG (see Note 2 to the Consolidated
Financial Statements).
Exploration and Production’s 1999 IBIT of $65 million reflected
increased depreciation, depletion and amortization and operating
expenses for the period through August 16, 1999, partially offset by
decreased exploration expenses. Exploration and Production’s 1998 IBIT
decreased $55 million as compared to 1997 primarily as a result of
decreased wellhead natural gas, crude oil and condensate prices, higher
operating and exploration expenses and depreciation, depletion and
amortization, partially offset by increased production volumes.

Corporate and Other
Corporate and Other includes results of Azurix Corp., which provides water and wastewater services, Enron Renewable Energy Corp.
(EREC), which develops and constructs wind-generated power projects,
and the operations of Enron’s methanol and MTBE plants. Significant
components of IBIT are as follows:
(In millions)
IBIT before items impacting comparability
Items impacting comparability:
Gain on sale of 7% of Enron Energy
Services shares
Gains on exchange and sales of Enron Oil
& Gas Company stock
Charge to reflect losses on contracted
MTBE production
Charge to reflect impairment of MTBE assets
Charge to reflect impact of amended
J-Block gas contract
Income before interest, minority interests
and taxes

1999
$ (17)

1998
$ 7

1997
$ (31)

Dividends on Company-Obligated Preferred Securities of Subsidiaries
Dividends on company-obligated preferred securities of subsidiaries
increased from $69 million in 1997 to $77 million in 1998 and $76 million
in 1999, primarily due to the issuance of $372 million of additional preferred securities by Enron subsidiaries during 1997. Company-obligated
preferred securities of subsidiaries also increased by $29 million in 1997
for securities of Portland General.

Minority Interests
Minority interests include the following:

$

-

-

61

454

22

-

(441)

(61)
-

(100)
-

-

-

(675)

(4)

$(32)

$(745)

Results for Corporate and Other in 1999 were impacted by higher
corporate expenses, partially offset by increased earnings from EREC
resulting from increased sales volumes from its German manufacturing
subsidiary and from the completion and sale of certain domestic wind
projects. Enron also recognized higher earnings related to Azurix.
Results in 1998 were favorably impacted by increases in the market
value of certain corporate-managed financial instruments, partially offset by higher corporate expenses.
Items impacting comparability in 1999 include a pre-tax gain of
$454 million on the exchange and sale of Enron’s interest in EOG (see
Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements) and a $441 million pretax charge for the impairment of its MTBE assets (see Note 17 to the
Consolidated Financial Statements).
During 1998, Enron recognized a pre-tax gain of $22 million on the
delivery of 10.5 million shares of EOG stock held by Enron as repayment
of mandatorily exchangeable debt. Enron also recorded a $61 million
charge to reflect losses on contracted MTBE production.
During 1997, Enron recorded a non-recurring charge of $675 million,
primarily reflecting the impact of Enron’s amended J-Block gas contract
in the U.K., and a $100 million charge to reflect losses on contracted
MTBE production. Also in 1997, Enron sold approximately 7% of its ownership of Energy Services for $130 million and recognized an after-tax
gain of $61 million.

Interest and Related Charges, Net

(In millions)
Jacaré Electrical Distribution Trust
Majority-owned limited partnerships
Whitewing Associates, L.P.
Enron Oil & Gas Company
Enron Global Power & Pipelines L.L.C.
Other

1999
$ 39
71
12
2
11
$135

1998
$ 53
24
$77

1997
$ 56
24
$80

Minority interests include Jacaré beginning January 1, 1999, majority-owned limited partnerships since their formation in December 1998
and July 1999, Whitewing from its formation in December 1997 until its
deconsolidation in March 1999, EOG until the exchange and sale of
Enron’s interests in August 1999 and Enron Global Power & Pipelines
L.L.C. until Enron acquired the minority interest in November 1997 (see
Notes 2, 8 and 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements).

Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense decreased in 1999 compared to 1998 primarily
as a result of increased equity earnings, tax benefits related to the foreign
tax rate differential and the audit settlement related to Monthly Income
Preferred Shares, partially offset by increased earnings.
Income tax expense increased in 1998 as compared to 1997 primarily
as a result of increased earnings, partially offset by differences between
the book and tax basis of certain assets and stock sales.

Cumulative Effect of Accounting Changes
In the first quarter of 1999, Enron recorded an after-tax charge of
$131 million to reflect the initial adoption (as of January 1, 1999) of two
new accounting pronouncements, the AICPA Statement of Position 98-5
(SOP 98-5), “Reporting on the Costs of Start-Up Activities,” and the
Emerging Issues Task Force Issue No. 98-10, “Accounting for Contracts
Involved in Energy Trading and Risk Management Activities.” The first
quarter 1999 charge was primarily related to the adoption of SOP 98-5.
See Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.

Interest and related charges, net of interest capitalized, increased
to $656 million in 1999 from $550 million in 1998 and $401 million in
1997. The increase in 1999 as compared to 1998 was primarily due to
debt issuances and debt related to Elektro, partially offset by a decrease
in debt related to EOG following the sale and exchange of Enron’s
interests in August 1999. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.
The increase in 1998 as compared to 1997 was primarily a result of
higher debt levels, including debt issuances and the consolidation in July
1997 of debt related to Portland General (see Note 2 to the Consolidated
Financial Statements).
Interest capitalized, which totaled $54 million, $66 million and $18
million for 1999, 1998, and 1997, respectively, increased in 1998 as a
result of the commencement of construction of several power projects.

35

YEAR 2000
A Year 2000 problem was anticipated which could have resulted from
the use in computer hardware and software of two digits rather than four
digits to define the applicable year. The use of two digits was a common
practice for decades when computer storage and processing was much
more expensive than today. When computer systems must process dates
both before and after January 1, 2000, two-digit year “fields” may create
processing ambiguities that can cause errors and system failures. For
example, computer programs that have date-sensitive features may recognize a date represented by “00” as the year 1900 instead of 2000.
The Year 2000 problem has caused no material disruption to
Enron’s mission-critical facilities or operations, and resulted in no material costs. Enron will remain vigilant for Year 2000 related problems that
may yet occur due to hidden defects in computer hardware or software
at Enron or Enron’s mission-critical external entities. Enron anticipates
that the Year 2000 problem will not create material disruptions to its
mission-critical facilities or operations, and will not create material costs.

NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
In June 1998, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)
issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 133,
“Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities.” See
Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.

in 1997 was generated from net issuances of $1,674 million of short- and
long-term debt, $372 million of preferred securities by subsidiary companies and $555 million of subsidiary equity. These inflows were partially
offset by payments of $354 million for cash dividends and $422 million
for treasury stock.

Capital Expenditures and Equity Investments
Capital expenditures by operating segment are as follows:

(In millions)
Transportation and Distribution
Wholesale Energy Operations
and Services
Retail Energy Services
Exploration and Production
Corporate and Other
Total

2000
Estimate
$ 287

1999
$ 316

1998
$ 310

1997
$ 337

1,517
47
35
$1,886

1,216
64
226
541
$2,363

706
75
690
124
$1,905

318
36
626
75
$1,392

Capital expenditures increased $458 million in 1999 and $513 million in 1998 as compared to the previous year. During 1999, Enron
Wholesale expenditures increased due primarily to construction of
domestic and international power plants and the Enron Broadband
Services fiber optic network. The 1999 increase in Corporate and Other
reflects the purchase of certain previously leased MTBE-related assets.
During 1998, Enron Wholesale expenditures increased primarily related
to domestic and international power plant construction.

FINANCIAL CONDITION
Cash used for investments in equity affiliates by the operating
segments is as follows:

Cash Flows
(In millions)
Cash provided by (used in):
Operating activities
Investing activities
Financing activities

1999
$ 1,228
(3,507)
2,456

1998
$ 1,640
(3,965)
2,266

1997
$ 211
(2,146)
1,849

Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $412 million in
1999, primarily reflecting increases in working capital and net assets
from price risk management activities, partially offset by increased earnings and higher proceeds from sales of merchant assets and investments.
The increase of $1,429 million in 1998 reflects positive operating cash
flow from Enron’s major business segments, proceeds from sales of interests in energy-related merchant assets and cash from timing and other
changes related to Enron’s commodity portfolio, partially offset by new
investments in merchant assets and investments. See Note 4 to the
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net cash used in investing activities primarily reflects capital expenditures and equity investments, which total $3,085 million in 1999,
$3,564 million in 1998 and $2,092 million in 1997. See “Capital
Expenditures and Equity Investments” below. Partially offsetting these
uses of cash were proceeds from the sales of non-merchant assets totaling $294 million in 1999, $239 million in 1998 and $473 million in 1997.
Proceeds in 1997 were primarily from sales of liquids assets.
Cash provided by financing activities in 1999 included $1,504 million
from the net issuance of short- and long-term debt, $852 million from the
issuance of common stock and $568 million from the formation of majority-owned limited partnerships, partially offset by payments of $467 million for dividends. Cash provided by financing activities in 1998 included
$875 million from the net issuance of short- and long-term debt, $867
million from the issuance of common stock and $828 million primarily
from the sale of a minority interest in a subsidiary, partially offset by payments of $414 million for dividends. Cash provided by financing activities

36

(In millions)
Transportation and Distribution
Wholesale Energy Operations and Services
Corporate and Other
Total

1999
$ 712
10
$722

1998
27
703
929
$1,659

$

1997
$ 3
580
117
$700

Equity investments in 1999 relate primarily to projects in Korea and
India. Equity investments increased in 1998 as compared to 1997 primarily
due to the acquisitions of Elektro and Wessex, net of proceeds from
transactions reducing Enron’s interests in these investments. See Notes 2
and 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The level of spending for capital expenditures and equity investments will vary depending upon conditions in the energy and broadband
markets, related economic conditions and identified opportunities.
Management expects that the capital spending program will be funded
by a combination of internally generated funds, proceeds from dispositions of selected assets and short- and long-term borrowings.

Working Capital
At December 31, 1999, Enron had working capital of $496 million.
If a working capital deficit should occur, Enron has credit facilities in
place to fund working capital requirements. At December 31, 1999,
those credit lines provided for up to $3.0 billion of committed and
uncommitted credit, of which $125 million was outstanding. Certain of
the credit agreements contain prefunding covenants. However, such
covenants are not expected to restrict Enron’s access to funds under
these agreements. In addition, Enron sells commercial paper and has
agreements to sell trade accounts receivable, thus providing financing to
meet seasonal working capital needs. Management believes that the
sources of funding described above are sufficient to meet short- and
long-term liquidity needs not met by cash flows from operations.

CAPITALIZATION

Financial Risk Management

Total capitalization at December 31, 1999 was $21.2 billion. Debt as
a percentage of total capitalization decreased to 38.5% at December 31,
1999 as compared to 41.9% at December 31, 1998. The decrease primarily reflects the issuance in February 1999 of approximately 27.6 million
shares of common stock, a net increase in minority interests and
increased preferred stock outstanding following the deconsolidation of
Whitewing Associates, L.P. (see Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial
Statements), partially offset by increased debt levels and a decrease in
equity due to the devaluation of the Brazilian real (see Note 2 to the
Consolidated Financial Statements).
Enron is a party to certain financial contracts which contain provisions for early settlement in the event of a significant market price
decline in which Enron’s common stock falls below certain levels (prices
ranging from $15.48 to $28.00 per share) or if the credit ratings for
Enron’s unsecured, senior long-term debt obligations fall below investment grade. The impact of this early settlement could include the
issuance of additional shares of Enron common stock.
Enron’s senior unsecured long-term debt is currently rated BBB+ by
Standard & Poor’s Corporation and Baa2 by Moody’s Investor Services.
Enron’s continued investment grade status is critical to the success of its
wholesale businesses as well as its ability to maintain adequate liquidity.
Enron’s management believes it will be able to maintain or improve its
credit rating.

Enron Wholesale offers price risk management services primarily
related to commodities associated with the energy sector (natural gas,
electricity, crude oil and natural gas liquids). Energy Services also offers
price risk management services to its commercial and industrial customers.
These services are provided through a variety of financial instruments
including forward contracts, which may involve physical delivery of an
energy commodity, swap agreements, which may require payments to
(or receipt of payments from) counterparties based on the differential
between a fixed and variable price for the commodity, options and other
contractual arrangements. Interest rate risks and foreign currency risks
associated with the fair value of its energy commodities portfolio are
managed using a variety of financial instruments, including financial
futures, swaps and options.
Enron’s other businesses also enter into forwards, swaps and other
contracts primarily for the purpose of hedging the impact of market
fluctuations on assets, liabilities, production or other contractual commitments. Changes in the market value of these hedge transactions are
deferred until the gain or loss is recognized on the hedged item.
Enron manages market risk on a portfolio basis, subject to parameters established by its Board of Directors. Market risks are monitored by
an independent risk control group operating separately from the units
that create or actively manage these risk exposures to ensure compliance
with Enron’s stated risk management policies. Enron’s fixed price commodity contract portfolio is typically balanced to within an annual average of
1% of the total notional physical and financial transaction volumes
marketed.

Market Risk
The use of financial instruments by Enron’s businesses may expose
Enron to market and credit risks resulting from adverse changes in commodity and equity prices, interest rates and foreign exchange rates. For
Enron Wholesale’s and Energy Services’ businesses, the major market
risks are discussed below:
Commodity Price Risk. Commodity price risk is a consequence of
providing price risk management services to customers as well as owning and operating production facilities. As discussed above, Enron
actively manages this risk on a portfolio basis to ensure compliance with
Enron’s stated risk management policies. Forwards, futures, swaps and
options are utilized to manage Enron’s consolidated exposure to price
fluctuations related to production from its production facilities.
Interest Rate Risk. Interest rate risk is also a consequence of providing price risk management services to customers and having variable
rate debt obligations, as changing interest rates impact the discounted
value of future cash flows. Enron utilizes forwards, futures, swaps and
options to manage its interest rate risk.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk. Foreign currency exchange
rate risk is the result of Enron’s international operations and price risk
management services provided to its worldwide customer base. The primary purpose of Enron’s foreign currency hedging activities is to protect
against the volatility associated with foreign currency purchase and sale
transactions. Enron primarily utilizes forward exchange contracts, futures
and purchased options to manage Enron’s risk profile.
Equity Risk. Equity risk arises primarily from the assets and investments operations of Enron Wholesale, which provides capital to customers through equity participations in various investment activities.
Enron generally manages this risk by hedging specific investments using
futures, forwards, swaps and options.

37

Enron evaluates, measures and manages the market risk in its
investments on a daily basis utilizing value at risk and other methodologies. The quantification of market risk using value at risk provides a consistent measure of risk across diverse markets and products. The use of
these methodologies requires a number of key assumptions including
the selection of a confidence level for expected losses, the holding period for liquidation and the treatment of risks outside the value at risk
methodologies, including liquidity risk and event risk. Value at risk represents an estimate of reasonably possible net losses in earnings that
would be recognized on its investments assuming hypothetical movements in future market rates and no change in positions. Value at risk is
not necessarily indicative of actual results which may occur.

Value at Risk
Enron has performed an entity-wide value at risk analysis of virtually all of Enron’s financial assets and liabilities. Value at risk incorporates
numerous variables that could impact the fair value of Enron’s investments, including commodity prices, interest rates, foreign exchange
rates, equity prices and associated volatilities, as well as correlation within and across these variables. Enron estimates value at risk commodity,
interest rate and foreign exchange exposures using a model based on
Monte Carlo simulation of delta/gamma positions which captures a significant portion of the exposure related to option positions. The value at
risk for equity exposure discussed above is based on J.P. Morgan’s
RiskMetrics™ approach. Both value at risk methods utilize a one-day
holding period and a 95% confidence level. Cross-commodity correlations
are used as appropriate.
The use of value at risk models allows management to aggregate
risks across the company, compare risk on a consistent basis and identify
the drivers of risk. Because of the inherent limitations to value at risk,
including the use of delta/gamma approximations to value options, subjectivity in the choice of liquidation period and reliance on historical data
to calibrate the models, Enron relies on value at risk as only one component in its risk control process. In addition to using value at risk measures,
Enron performs regular stress and scenario analyses to estimate the
economic impact of sudden market moves on the value of its portfolios.
The results of the stress testing, along with the professional judgment of
experienced business and risk managers, are used to supplement the
value at risk methodology and capture additional market-related risks,
including volatility, liquidity and event, concentration and correlation risks.

38

The following table illustrates the value at risk for each component
of market risk:
December 31,
(In millions)
Trading Market Risk:
Commodity price
Interest rate
Foreign currency
exchange rate
Equity(c)

Year ended December 31, 1999
High
Low
Average(a) Valuation(a) Valuation(a)

1999

1998

$21
-

$20
-

$24
-

$37(b)
-

$16
-

26

12

20

29

14

1
2

10
-

8
2

18
2

1
1

4
3

-

3
-

5
3

-

Non-Trading Market Risk(d):
Commodity price(e)
Interest rate
Foreign currency
exchange rate
Equity

(a) The average value presents a twelve month average of the month-end values. The high
and low valuations for each market risk component represent the highest and lowest
month-end value during 1999.
(b) In June 1999, seasonal dynamics in the U.S. power markets caused Enron’s value at risk
to increase significantly.
(c) Enron’s equity trading market risk primarily relates to merchant activities (see Note 4 to
the Consolidated Financial Statements). The increase in value at risk in 1999 is due primarily to greater volatility in investments held throughout 1999, increased levels of more
volatile communications investments and further refinement of Enron’s value at risk
model to allow the inclusion of certain partnership interests and other instruments for
the first time.
(d) Includes only the risk related to the financial instruments that serve as hedges and does
not include the related underlying hedged item.
(e) Enron’s hedging activity decreased following the exchange and sale of Enron’s interest
in EOG (see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements).

Accounting Policies
Accounting policies for price risk management and hedging activities
are described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.

Information Regarding
Forward-Looking Statements

Management’s Responsibility for
Financial Reporting

This Annual Report includes forward-looking statements within the
meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. All statements other than statements of historical facts contained in this document are forward-looking
statements. Forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to,
statements relating to expansion opportunities for the Gas Pipeline
Group, demand in the market for broadband services and high bandwidth applications, transaction volumes in the U.S. power market, commencement of commercial operations of new power plants and pipeline
projects and growth in the demand for retail energy outsourcing solutions. When used in this document, the words "anticipate," "believe,"
"estimate," "expect," "intend," "may," "project," "plan," "should" and
similar expressions are intended to be among the statements that identify forward-looking statements. Although Enron believes that its expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions, such statements involve risk and uncertainties and
no assurance can be given that actual results will be consistent with
these forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause
actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking
statements herein include political developments in foreign countries;
the ability of Enron to penetrate new retail natural gas and electricity
markets (including energy outsourcing markets) in the United States and
Europe; the ability to penetrate the broadband services market; the timing and extent of deregulation of energy markets in the United States
and in foreign jurisdictions; other regulatory developments in the
United States and in foreign countries, including tax legislation and
regulations; the extent of efforts by governments to privatize natural
gas and electric utilities and other industries; the timing and extent of
changes in commodity prices for crude oil, natural gas, electricity, foreign
currency and interest rates; the extent of success in acquiring oil and gas
properties and in discovering, developing, producing and marketing
reserves; the timing and success of Enron’s efforts to develop international power, pipeline and other infrastructure projects; the effectiveness
of Enron’s risk management activities; the ability of counterparties to
financial risk management instruments and other contracts with Enron
to meet their financial commitments to Enron; the effectiveness of
Enron’s Year 2000 Plan and the Year 2000 readiness of outside entities;
and Enron’s ability to access the capital markets and equity markets during the periods covered by the forward-looking statements, which will
depend on general market conditions and Enron’s ability to maintain or
increase the credit ratings for its unsecured senior long-term debt obligations.

The following financial statements of Enron Corp. and subsidiaries
(collectively, Enron) were prepared by management, which is responsible
for their integrity and objectivity. The statements have been prepared in
conformity with generally accepted accounting principles and necessarily include some amounts that are based on the best estimates and judgments of management.
The system of internal controls of Enron is designed to provide reasonable assurance as to the reliability of financial statements and the
protection of assets from unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition.
This system is augmented by written policies and guidelines and the
careful selection and training of qualified personnel. It should be recognized, however, that there are inherent limitations in the effectiveness
of any system of internal control. Accordingly, even an effective internal
control system can provide only reasonable assurance with respect to the
preparation of reliable financial statements and safeguarding of assets.
Further, because of changes in conditions, internal control system effectiveness may vary over time.
Enron assessed its internal control system as of December 31, 1999,
1998 and 1997, relative to current standards of control criteria. Based
upon this assessment, management believes that its system of internal
controls was adequate during the periods to provide reasonable assurance as to the reliability of financial statements and the protection of
assets against unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition.
Arthur Andersen LLP was engaged to audit the financial statements
of Enron and issue reports thereon. Their audits included developing an
overall understanding of Enron’s accounting systems, procedures and
internal controls and conducting tests and other auditing procedures
sufficient to support their opinion on the financial statements. Arthur
Andersen LLP was also engaged to examine and report on management’s assertion about the effectiveness of Enron’s system of internal
controls. The Reports of Independent Public Accountants appear in this
Annual Report.
The adequacy of Enron’s financial controls and the accounting principles employed in financial reporting are under the general oversight of
the Audit Committee of Enron Corp.’s Board of Directors. No member of
this committee is an officer or employee of Enron. The independent
public accountants have direct access to the Audit Committee, and they
meet with the committee from time to time, with and without financial
management present, to discuss accounting, auditing and financial
reporting matters.

39

Reports of Independent Public Accountants
To the Shareholders and Board of Directors of Enron Corp.:

To the Shareholders and Board of Directors of Enron Corp.:

We have examined management’s assertion that the system of
internal control of Enron Corp. (an Oregon corporation) and subsidiaries
as of December 31, 1999, 1998 and 1997 was adequate to provide reasonable assurance as to the reliability of financial statements and the
protection of assets from unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition,
included in the accompanying report on Management’s Responsibility
for Financial Reporting. Management is responsible for maintaining
effective internal control over the reliability of financial statements and
the protection of assets against unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on management’s
assertion based on our examination.
Our examinations were made in accordance with attestation standards established by the American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants and, accordingly, included obtaining an understanding of
the system of internal control, testing and evaluating the design and
operating effectiveness of the system of internal control and such other
procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe
that our examinations provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Because of inherent limitations in any system of internal control,
errors or fraud may occur and not be detected. Also, projections of any
evaluation of the system of internal control to future periods are subject
to the risk that the system of internal control may become inadequate
because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
In our opinion, management’s assertion that the system of internal
control of Enron Corp. and its subsidiaries as of December 31, 1999, 1998
and 1997 was adequate to provide reasonable assurance as to the reliability of financial statements and the protection of assets from unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition is fairly stated, in all material
respects, based upon current standards of control criteria.

We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheet of
Enron Corp. (an Oregon corporation) and subsidiaries as of December
31, 1999 and 1998, and the related consolidated statements of income,
comprehensive income, cash flows and changes in shareholders’ equity
for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 1999.
These financial statements are the responsibility of Enron Corp.’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial
statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with auditing standards
generally accepted in the United States. Those standards require that we
plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An
audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the
amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also
includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial
statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable
basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of Enron Corp. and
subsidiaries as of December 31, 1999 and 1998, and the results of their
operations, cash flows and changes in shareholders’ equity for each of
the three years in the period ended December 31, 1999, in conformity
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States.
As discussed in Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements,
Enron Corp. and subsidiaries changed its method of accounting for
costs of start-up activities and its method of accounting for certain
contracts involved in energy trading and risk management activities in
the first quarter of 1999.

Arthur Andersen LLP
Arthur Andersen LLP
Houston, Texas
March 13, 2000

40

Houston, Texas
March 13, 2000

Enron Corp. and Subsidiaries Consolidated Income Statement
1999

Year ended December 31,
1998

(In millions, except per share amounts)
Revenues
Natural gas and other products
Electricity
Transportation
Other
Total revenues

$19,536
15,238
588
4,750
40,112

$13,276
13,939
627
3,418
31,260

$13,211
5,101
652
1,309
20,273

Costs and Expenses
Cost of gas, electricity and other products
Operating expenses
Oil and gas exploration expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes, other than income taxes
Impairment of long-lived assets
Contract restructuring charge
Total costs and expenses

34,761
2,996
49
870
193
441
39,310

26,381
2,352
121
827
201
29,882

17,311
1,406
102
600
164
675
20,258

802

1,378

15

Other Income and Deductions
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated equity affiliates
Gains on sales of assets and investments
Interest income
Other income, net
Income Before Interest, Minority Interests and Income Taxes

309
541
162
181
1,995

97
56
88
(37)
1,582

216
186
70
78
565

Interest and related charges, net
Dividends on company-obligated preferred securities of subsidiaries
Minority interests
Income tax expense (benefit)
Net income before cumulative effect of accounting changes
Cumulative effect of accounting changes, net of tax
Net Income

656
76
135
104
1,024
(131)
893

550
77
77
175
703
703

401
69
80
(90)
105
105

Operating Income

Preferred stock dividends
Earnings on Common Stock
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
Basic
Before cumulative effect of accounting changes
Cumulative effect of accounting changes
Basic earnings per share
Diluted
Before cumulative effect of accounting changes
Cumulative effect of accounting changes
Diluted earnings per share
Average Number of Common Shares Used in Computation
Basic
Diluted

$

66
827

$

$

1.36
(0.19)
$ 1.17

$

$

$

1.27
(0.17)
$ 1.10

$

$

705
769

17
686

1997

$

1.07
1.07

$

1.01
1.01

$

$

$

642
695

17
88

0.16
0.16
0.16
0.16
544
555

Enron Corp. and Subsidiaries Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income
(In millions)
Net Income
Other comprehensive income:
Foreign currency translation adjustment and other
Total Comprehensive Income

1999
$ 893

$

(579)
314

Year ended December 31,
1998
$ 703

$

1997
105

(14)
689

$

(21)
84

$

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.

41

Enron Corp. and Subsidiaries Consolidated Balance Sheet
December 31,
(In millions, except shares)
ASSETS

1999

1998

Current Assets
Cash and cash equivalents

$

288

$

111

Trade receivables (net of allowance for doubtful
accounts of $40 and $14, respectively)
Other receivables
Assets from price risk management activities

3,030

2,060

518

833

2,205

1,904

Inventories

598

514

Other

616

511

7,255

5,933

Investments in and advances to unconsolidated equity affiliates

5,036

4,433

Assets from price risk management activities

2,929

1,941

Goodwill

2,799

1,949

Total current assets

Investments and Other Assets

Other

4,681

4,437

15,445

12,760

Natural gas transmission

6,948

6,936

Electric generation and distribution

3,552

2,061

Construction in progress

1,491

989

690

4,814

Total investments and other assets

Property, Plant and Equipment, at cost

Oil and gas, successful efforts method
Other

Less accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization
Property, plant and equipment, net

Total Assets
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.

42

1,231

992

13,912

15,792

3,231

5,135

10,681

10,657

$33,381

$29,350

December 31,
1999

1998

$ 2,154
1,836
1,001
1,768
6,759

$ 2,380
2,511
1,216
6,107

Long-Term Debt

7,151

7,357

Deferred Credits and Other Liabilities
Deferred income taxes
Liabilities from price risk management activities
Other
Total deferred credits and other liabilities

1,894
2,990
1,587
6,471

2,357
1,421
1,916
5,694

Minority Interests

2,430

2,143

Company-Obligated Preferred Securities of Subsidiaries

1,000

1,001

130

132

1,000

-

6,637
2,698
(741)

5,117
2,226
(162)

(49)
(105)
9,570

(195)
(70)
7,048

$33,381

$29,350

LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities
Accounts payable
Liabilities from price risk management activities
Short-term debt
Other
Total current liabilities

Commitments and Contingencies (Notes 3, 13, 14 and 15)

Shareholders’ Equity
Second preferred stock, cumulative, no par
value, 1,370,000 shares authorized,
1,296,184 shares and 1,319,848 shares of
Cumulative Second Preferred Convertible
Stock issued, respectively
Mandatorily Convertible Junior Preferred
Stock, Series B, no par value, 250,000
shares issued
Common stock, no par value, 1,200,000,000
shares authorized, 716,865,081 shares
and 671,094,552 shares issued, respectively
Retained earnings
Accumulated other comprehensive income
Common stock held in treasury, 1,337,714
shares and 9,333,322 shares, respectively
Restricted stock and other
Total shareholders’ equity
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity

43

Enron Corp. and Subsidiaries Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
(In millions)
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
Reconciliation of net income to net cash provided by operating activities
Net income
Cumulative effect of accounting changes
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Oil and gas exploration expenses
Impairment of long-lived assets
Deferred income taxes
Gains on sales of assets and investments
Changes in components of working capital
Net assets from price risk management activities
Merchant assets and investments:
Realized gains on sales
Proceeds from sales
Additions and unrealized gains
Other operating activities
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities

$

893
131
870
49
441
21
(541)
(1,000)
(395)

Year ended December 31,
1998

$

703
827
121
87
(82)
(233)
350

1997

$

105
600
102
(174)
(195)
(65)
201

(756)
2,217
(827)
125
1,228

(628)
1,434
(721)
(218)
1,640

(136)
339
(308)
(258)
211

Cash Flows From Investing Activities
Capital expenditures
Equity investments
Proceeds from sales of investments and other assets
Acquisition of subsidiary stock
Business acquisitions, net of cash acquired (see Note 2)
Other investing activities
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities

(2,363)
(722)
294
(311)
(405)
(3,507)

(1,905)
(1,659)
239
(180)
(104)
(356)
(3,965)

(1,392)
(700)
473
(82)
(445)
(2,146)

Cash Flows From Financing Activities
Issuance of long-term debt
Repayment of long-term debt
Net increase (decrease) in short-term borrowings
Issuance of company-obligated preferred securities of subsidiaries
Issuance of common stock
Issuance of subsidiary equity
Dividends paid
Net (acquisition) disposition of treasury stock
Other financing activities
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities

1,776
(1,837)
1,565
852
568
(467)
139
(140)
2,456

1,903
(870)
(158)
8
867
828
(414)
13
89
2,266

1,817
(607)
464
372
555
(354)
(422)
24
1,849

177
111
288

(59)
170
111

(86)
256
170

Increase (Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and Cash Equivalents, Beginning of Year
Cash and Cash Equivalents, End of Year
Changes in Components of Working Capital
Receivables
Inventories
Payables
Other
Total
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.

44

1999

$

$ (662)
(133)
(246)
41
$(1,000)

$

$(1,055)
(372)
433
761
$ (233)

$
$

351
63
(366)
(113)
$ (65)

Enron Corp. and Subsidiaries Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity
(In millions, except per share
amounts; shares in thousands)
Cumulative Second Preferred Convertible Stock
Balance, beginning of year
Exchange of common stock for convertible preferred stock
Balance, end of year
Mandatorily Convertible Junior Preferred Stock, Series B
Balance, beginning of year
Issuances
Balance, end of year
Common Stock
Balance, beginning of year
Exchange of common stock for convertible preferred stock
Issuances related to benefit and dividend reinvestment plans
Sales of common stock
Issuances of common stock in business acquisitions (see Note 2)
Issuance of no par stock in reincorporation merger
Other
Balance, end of year
Additional Paid-in Capital
Balance, beginning of year
Sales and issuances of common stock
Issuance of no par stock in reincorporation merger
Other
Balance, end of year
Retained Earnings
Balance, beginning of year
Net income
Cash dividends
Common stock ($0.5000, $0.4812 and $0.4562
per share in 1999, 1998 and 1997, respectively)
Cumulative Second Preferred Convertible Stock
($13.652, $13.1402 and $12.4584 per share
in 1999, 1998 and 1997, respectively)
Series A and B Preferred Stock
Balance, end of year
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
Balance, beginning of year
Translation adjustments and other
Balance, end of year
Treasury Stock
Balance, beginning of year
Shares acquired
Exchange of common stock for convertible preferred stock
Issuances related to benefit and dividend reinvestment plans
Issuances of treasury stock in business acquisitions (see Note 2)
Balance, end of year
Restricted Stock and Other
Balance, beginning of year
Issuances related to benefit and dividend reinvestment plans
Balance, end of year
Total Shareholders’ Equity

1999

1998

1997

Shares

Amount

Shares

Amount

Shares

Amount

1,320
(24)
1,296

$ 132
(2)
$ 130

1,338
(18)
1,320

$ 134
(2)
$ 132

1,371
(33)
1,338

$ 137
(3)
$ 134

250
250

$
1,000
$1,000

-

671,094
465
10,054
27,600
7,652
716,865

$5,117
(1)
258
839
250
174
$6,637

636,594
34,500
671,094

$

(9,334)
(1,845)
181
9,660
(1,338)

-

-

$

$4,224
(7)
45
836
19
$5,117

511,890
764
123,940
636,594

$

$

26
(3)
2,281
1,881
39
$4,224
$1,870
10
(1,881)
1
$
-

$2,226
893

$1,852
703

$2,007
105

(355)

(312)

(243)

(17)
(49)
$2,698

(17)
$2,226

(17)
$1,852

$ (162)
(579)
$ (741)

$ (148)
(14)
$ (162)

$ (127)
(21)
$ (148)

$ (195)
(71)
4
213
$ (49)
$

(70)
(35)
$ (105)
$9,570

$

$

-

-

$

-

$

$

(14,102)
(2,236)
486
6,426
92
(9,334)

$ (269)
(61)
9
124
2
$ (195)
$ (175)
105
$ (70)
$7,048

(1,642)
(19,580)
140
5,676
1,304
(14,102)

$

(30)
(374)
3
106
26
$ (269)

$ (160)
(15)
$ (175)
$5,618

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.

45

Enron Corp. and Subsidiaries Notes to the
Consolidated Financial Statements
1

SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES

Consolidation Policy and Use of Estimates
The accounting and financial reporting policies of Enron Corp. and
its subsidiaries conform to generally accepted accounting principles and
prevailing industry practices. The consolidated financial statements
include the accounts of all subsidiaries controlled by Enron Corp. after
the elimination of significant intercompany accounts and transactions,
unless control is temporary.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and
liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of
the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and
expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from
those estimates.
“Enron” is used from time to time herein as a collective reference
to Enron Corp. and its subsidiaries and affiliates. The businesses of Enron
are conducted by Enron Corp.’s subsidiaries and affiliates whose operations are managed by their respective officers.

Cash Equivalents
Enron records as cash equivalents all highly liquid short-term investments with original maturities of three months or less.

Inventories
Inventories consist primarily of commodities, priced at market.

Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization
The provision for depreciation and amortization with respect to
operations other than oil and gas producing activities is computed
using the straight-line or regulatorily mandated method, based on
estimated economic lives. Composite depreciation rates are applied to
functional groups of property having similar economic characteristics.
The cost of utility property units retired, other than land, is charged to
accumulated depreciation.
Provisions for depreciation, depletion and amortization of proved oil
and gas properties are calculated using the units-of-production method.

Income Taxes
Enron accounts for income taxes using an asset and liability
approach under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized
based on anticipated future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases (see Note 5).

Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share is computed based upon the weightedaverage number of common shares outstanding during the periods.
Diluted earnings per share is computed based upon the weighted-average
number of common shares outstanding plus the assumed issuance of
common shares for all potentially dilutive securities. All share and per
share amounts have been adjusted to reflect the August 13, 1999 twofor-one stock split. See Note 11 for a reconciliation of the basic and diluted
earnings per share computations.

46

Accounting for Price Risk Management
Enron engages in price risk management activities for both trading
and non-trading purposes. Instruments utilized in connection with trading activities are accounted for using the mark-to-market method.
Under the mark-to-market method of accounting, forwards, swaps,
options, energy transportation contracts utilized for trading activities
and other instruments with third parties are reflected at fair value and
are shown as “Assets and Liabilities from Price Risk Management
Activities” in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. These activities also
include the risk management component embedded in energy outsourcing contracts. Unrealized gains and losses from newly originated
contracts, contract restructurings and the impact of price movements are
recognized as “Other Revenues.” Changes in the assets and liabilities
from price risk management activities result primarily from changes in
the valuation of the portfolio of contracts, newly originated transactions
and the timing of settlement relative to the receipt of cash for certain
contracts. The market prices used to value these transactions reflect
management’s best estimate considering various factors including closing exchange and over-the-counter quotations, time value and volatility
factors underlying the commitments. The values are adjusted to reflect
the potential impact of liquidating Enron’s position in an orderly manner over a reasonable period of time under present market conditions.
Financial instruments are also utilized for non-trading purposes to
hedge the impact of market fluctuations on assets, liabilities, production
and other contractual commitments. Hedge accounting is utilized in
non-trading activities when there is a high degree of correlation
between price movements in the derivative and the item designated as
being hedged. In instances where the anticipated correlation of price
movements does not occur, hedge accounting is terminated and future
changes in the value of the financial instruments are recognized as gains
or losses. If the hedged item is sold, the value of the financial instrument
is recognized in income. Gains and losses on financial instruments used
for hedging purposes are recognized in the Consolidated Income
Statement in the same manner as the hedged item.
The cash flow impact of financial instruments is reflected as cash
flows from operating activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash
Flows. See Note 3 for further discussion of Enron’s price risk management activities.

Accounting for Oil and Gas Producing Activities
Enron accounts for oil and gas exploration and production activities
under the successful efforts method of accounting. All development
wells and related production equipment and lease acquisition costs are
capitalized when incurred. Unproved properties are assessed regularly
and any impairment in value is recognized. Lease rentals and exploration costs, other than the costs of drilling exploratory wells, are
expensed as incurred. Unsuccessful exploratory wells are expensed when
determined to be non-productive.
Exploration costs and dry hole costs are included in the
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows as investing activities.

Accounting for Development Activity
Development costs related to projects, including costs of feasibility
studies, bid preparation, permitting, licensing and contract negotiation,
are expensed as incurred until the project is estimated to be probable.
At that time, such costs are capitalized or expensed as incurred, based on
the nature of the costs incurred. Capitalized development costs may be
recovered through reimbursements from joint venture partners or other
third parties, or classified as part of the investment and recovered
through the cash flows from that project. Accumulated capitalized project development costs are otherwise expensed in the period that management determines it is probable that the costs will not be recovered.

Environmental Expenditures
Expenditures that relate to an existing condition caused by past
operations, and do not contribute to current or future revenue generation, are expensed. Environmental expenditures relating to current or
future revenues are expensed or capitalized as appropriate based on the
nature of the costs incurred. Liabilities are recorded when environmental assessments and/or clean-ups are probable and the costs can be reasonably estimated.

Computer Software
Enron’s accounting policy for the costs of computer software (all of
which is for internal use only) is to capitalize direct costs of materials
and services consumed in developing or obtaining software, including
payroll and payroll-related costs for employees who are directly associated with and who devote time to the software project. Costs may
begin to be capitalized once the application development stage has
begun. All other costs are expensed as incurred. Enron amortizes the
costs on a straight-line basis over the useful life of the software.
Impairment is evaluated based on changes in the expected usefulness
of the software. At December 31, 1999 and 1998, Enron has capitalized
$240 million and $189 million, respectively, of software costs covering
numerous systems, including trading and settlement, billing and payroll
systems and upgrades.

Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates
Investments in unconsolidated affiliates are accounted for by the
equity method, except for certain investments resulting from Enron’s
merchant investment activities which are included at market value in
“Other Investments” in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. See Notes 4 and
9. Where acquired assets are accounted for under the equity method
based on temporary control, earnings or losses are recognized only for
the portion of the investment to be retained.

Foreign Currency Translation
For international subsidiaries, asset and liability accounts are translated at year-end rates of exchange and revenue and expenses are translated at average exchange rates prevailing during the year. For subsidiaries whose functional currency is deemed to be other than the U.S.
dollar, translation adjustments are included as a separate component of
other comprehensive income and shareholders’ equity. Currency transaction gains and losses are recorded in income.

Reclassifications
Certain reclassifications have been made to the consolidated financial statements for prior years to conform with the current presentation.

2

BUSINESS ACQUISITIONS AND DISPOSITIONS

On August 16, 1999, Enron exchanged approximately 62.3 million
shares (approximately 75%) of the Enron Oil & Gas Company (EOG) common stock it held for all of the stock of EOGI-India, Inc., a subsidiary of
EOG. EOGI-India, Inc. indirectly owns oil and gas operations in India and
China and $600 million of cash. Also in August 1999, Enron received net
proceeds of approximately $190 million for the sale of 8.5 million shares
of EOG common stock in a public offering and issued approximately
$255 million of public debt that is exchangeable in July 2002 into
approximately 11.5 million shares of EOG common stock. As a result of
the share exchange and share sale, Enron recorded a pre-tax gain of
$454 million ($345 million after tax, or $0.45 per diluted share) in 1999.
Enron retained 11.5 million shares of EOG stock (now EOG Resources,
Inc.) which will be exchanged at the maturity of the debt. As of August
16, 1999, EOG is no longer included in Enron’s consolidated financial
statements. As a result, net property, plant and equipment decreased by
approximately $2,400 million, short- and long-term debt decreased by
approximately $1,800 million and minority interests decreased by
approximately $600 million. EOGI-India, Inc. is included in the consolidated financial statements within the Wholesale Energy Operations and
Services segment following the exchange and sale.
In August 1998, Enron, through a wholly-owned subsidiary, completed the acquisition of a controlling interest in Elektro Eletricidade e
Serviços S.A. (Elektro), an electricity distributor in Brazil, for approximately $1.3 billion. Enron’s interest in Elektro is held by Jacaré Electrical
Distribution Trust (Jacaré) and was initially accounted for using the equity method based on temporary control. In December 1998, Enron financially closed the Elektro financial restructuring, reducing its interest in
Jacaré to 51%. Following the decision by Enron to acquire additional
interests in Elektro, Enron consolidated Jacaré effective January 1, 1999.
Jacaré’s balance sheet at that date consisted of net assets of approximately $1,340 million, including goodwill of approximately $990 million,
net property, plant and equipment of approximately $1,100 million and
debt of approximately $900 million. As a result of the consolidation, as
of January 1, 1999, Enron’s investment in unconsolidated affiliates
decreased by approximately $450 million and minority interests
increased by approximately $890 million. During 1999, the exchange
rate for the Brazilian real to the U.S. dollar declined, resulting in a noncash foreign currency translation adjustment which reduced Enron’s
Brazilian assets (primarily Elektro) and shareholders’ equity by approximately $600 million.
In November 1997, Enron acquired the minority interest in Enron
Global Power & Pipelines L.L.C. (EPP) in a stock-for-stock transaction.
Enron issued approximately 23 million common shares in exchange for
the EPP shares held by the minority shareholders.
Effective July 1, 1997, Enron merged with Portland General
Corporation (PGC) in a stock-for-stock transaction. Enron issued approximately 101 million common shares to shareholders of PGC and assumed
PGC’s outstanding debt of approximately $1.1 billion.
Additionally, during 1999, 1998 and 1997, Enron acquired generation, natural gas distribution, renewable energy, telecommunications
and energy management businesses for cash, Enron and subsidiary stock
and notes.
Enron has accounted for these acquisitions using the purchase
method of accounting as of the effective date of each transaction.
Accordingly, the purchase price of each transaction has been allocated
based upon the estimated fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired
as of the acquisition date, with the excess reflected as goodwill in the
Consolidated Balance Sheet. This goodwill is being amortized on a
straight-line basis over 5 to 40 years.

47

Assets acquired, liabilities assumed and consideration paid as a
result of businesses acquired were as follows:
(In millions)
Fair value of assets acquired,
other than cash
Goodwill
Fair value of liabilities assumed
Common stock of Enron and
subsidiary issued
Net cash paid

1999

1998(a)

1997

$376
(71)
6

$ 269
94
(259)

$ 3,829
1,847
(3,235)

$311

$ 104

(2,359)
$
82

(a) Excludes amounts related to the 1998 acquisition of Elektro prior to the consolidation
of Jacaré.

If the PGC and EPP acquisitions had occurred at the beginning of
1997, Enron’s 1997 consolidated revenues would have been $20,950 million, income before interest, minority interests and income taxes would
have been $716 million, net income would have been $181 million and
earnings per share would have been $0.27 (basic) and $0.26 (diluted).
These unaudited pro forma results are for illustrative purposes only and
are not necessarily indicative of the operating results that would have
occurred had the business acquisitions been consummated at that date,
nor are they necessarily indicative of future operating results.
On November 8, 1999, Enron announced that it had entered into
an agreement to sell Enron’s wholly-owned electric utility subsidiary,
Portland General Electric Company (PGE), to Sierra Pacific Resources for
$2.1 billion, comprised of $2.02 billion in cash and the assumption of
Enron’s approximately $80 million merger payment obligation. Sierra
Pacific Resources will also assume approximately $1 billion in PGE debt
and preferred stock. The proposed transaction, which is subject to customary regulatory approvals, is expected to close in late 2000. Enron’s
carrying amount of PGE is approximately $1.4 billion. Income before
interest, minority interest and income taxes for PGE was $298 million
and $284 million for 1999 and 1998, respectively, and $114 million for
the six months ended December 31, 1997.

3

Foreign currency
Equity investments

Enron, through its Wholesale Energy Operations and Services
(Enron Wholesale) and Retail Energy Services (Energy Services) segments,
offers price risk management services to wholesale, commercial and
industrial customers through a variety of financial and other instruments
including forward contracts involving physical delivery of an energy
commodity, swap agreements, which require payments to (or receipt of
payments from) counterparties based on the differential between a
fixed and variable price for the commodity, options and other contractual arrangements. Interest rate risks and foreign currency risks associated with the fair value of the commodity portfolio are managed using a
variety of financial instruments, including financial futures.
Notional Amounts and Terms. The notional amounts and terms of
these instruments at December 31, 1999 are shown below (volumes in
trillions of British thermal units equivalent (TBtue), dollars in millions):

Fixed Price
Receiver

Maximum
Terms in Years

6,642
1,342
1,853
352

5,921
749
1,606
541

24
7
25
10

$2,151
619
2,195

$4,288
88
882

29
15
14

(a) The interest rate fixed price receiver includes the net notional dollar value of the interest
rate sensitive component of the combined commodity portfolio. The remaining interest
rate fixed price receiver and the entire interest rate fixed price payor represent the
notional contract amount of a portfolio of various financial instruments used to hedge
the net present value of the commodity portfolio. For a given unit of price protection,
different financial instruments require different notional amounts.

Enron Wholesale and Energy Services include sales and purchase
commitments associated with commodity contracts based on market
prices totaling 9,013 TBtue, with terms extending up to 21 years.
Notional amounts reflect the volume of transactions but do not
represent the amounts exchanged by the parties to the financial instruments. Accordingly, notional amounts do not accurately measure Enron’s
exposure to market or credit risks. The maximum terms in years detailed
above are not indicative of likely future cash flows as these positions
may be offset in the markets at any time in response to the company’s
price risk management needs to the extent available in the market.
The volumetric weighted average maturity of Enron’s fixed price
portfolio as of December 31, 1999 was approximately 2.0 years.
Fair Value. The fair value as of December 31, 1999 and the average
fair value of instruments related to price risk management activities,
including energy related commodities together with the related foreign
currency and interest rate instruments, other commodities and equities
held during the year are set forth below:

PRICE RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES AND FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS

Trading Activities

48

Commodities
Natural gas
Crude oil and liquids
Electricity
Other
Financial products
Interest rate(a)

Fixed Price
Payor

(In millions)
Natural gas
Crude oil and liquids
Electricity
Other commodities
Equity
Total

Fair Value
as of 12/31/99
Assets Liabilities
$3,267
$2,335
649
1,832
906
380
163
32
486
247
$5,471
$4,826

Average Fair Value
for the Year Ended
12/31/99(a)
Assets Liabilities
$3,080
$2,506
806
1,486
726
352
219
129
165
149
$4,996
$4,622

(a) Computed using the ending balance at each month-end.

The income before interest, taxes and certain unallocated expenses
arising from price risk management activities for 1999 was $765 million.
Credit Risk. In conjunction with the valuation of its financial instruments, Enron provides reserves for risks associated with such activity,
including credit risk. Credit risk relates to the risk of loss that Enron
would incur as a result of nonperformance by counterparties pursuant
to the terms of their contractual obligations. Enron maintains credit
policies with regard to its counterparties that management believes significantly minimize overall credit risk. These policies include an evaluation of potential counterparties’ financial condition (including credit rating), collateral requirements under certain circumstances and the use of
standardized agreements which allow for the netting of positive and
negative exposures associated with a single counterparty. Enron also

minimizes this credit exposure using monetization of its contract portfolio or third-party insurance contracts. The counterparties associated
with assets from price risk management activities as of December 31,
1999 and 1998 are summarized as follows:

(In millions)
Gas and electric utilities
Energy marketers
Financial institutions
Independent power producers
Oil and gas producers
Industrials
Other
Total
Credit and other reserves
Assets from price risk
management activities(b)

1999
Investment
Grade(a)
Total
$1,461
$1,510
544
768
1,016
1,273
471
641
379
688
336
524
59
67
$4,266
5,471
(337)

1998
Investment
Grade(a)
Total
$1,181
$1,251
684
795
505
505
416
613
365
549
229
341
101
116
$3,481
4,170
(325)

$5,134

$3,845

(a) “Investment Grade” is primarily determined using publicly available credit ratings along
with consideration of collateral, which encompass standby letters of credit, parent company guarantees and property interests, including oil and gas reserves. Included in
“Investment Grade” are counterparties with a minimum Standard & Poor’s or Moody’s
rating of BBB- or Baa3, respectively.
(b) Two customers’ exposures at December 31, 1999 and 1998 comprise greater than 5% of
Assets From Price Risk Management Activities and are included above as Investment Grade.

This concentration of counterparties may impact Enron’s overall
exposure to credit risk, either positively or negatively, in that the counterparties may be similarly affected by changes in economic, regulatory
or other conditions. Based on Enron’s policies, its exposures and its credit
and other reserves, Enron does not anticipate a materially adverse effect
on financial position or results of operations as a result of counterparty
nonperformance.

Non-Trading Activities
Enron’s other businesses also enter into swaps and other contracts
primarily for the purpose of hedging the impact of market fluctuations
on assets, liabilities, production or other contractual commitments.
Energy Commodity Price Swaps. At December 31, 1999, Enron was
a party to energy commodity price swaps covering 15.4 TBtu, 3.5 TBtu
and 15.0 TBtu of natural gas for the years 2000, 2001 and 2002, respectively, and 2.2 million barrels of crude oil for the year 2000.
Interest Rate Swaps. At December 31, 1999, Enron had entered into
interest rate swap agreements with an aggregate notional principal
amount of $2.2 billion to manage interest rate exposure. These swap
agreements are scheduled to terminate $1.4 billion in 2000 and $0.8 billion in the period 2001 through 2008.
Equity Contracts. At December 31, 1999, Enron had entered into
Enron common stock swaps, with an aggregate notional amount of $60
million, to hedge certain incentive-based compensation plans. Such contracts will expire in 2000.

Credit Risk. While notional amounts are used to express the volume
of various financial instruments, the amounts potentially subject to credit risk, in the event of nonperformance by the third parties, are substantially smaller. Counterparties to forwards, futures and other contracts
are equivalent to investment grade financial institutions. Accordingly,
Enron does not anticipate any material impact to its financial position or
results of operations as a result of nonperformance by the third-parties
on financial instruments related to non-trading activities.
Enron has concentrations of customers in the electric and gas utility and oil and gas exploration and production industries. These concentrations of customers may impact Enron’s overall exposure to credit risk,
either positively or negatively, in that the customers may be similarly
affected by changes in economic or other conditions. However, Enron’s
management believes that its portfolio of receivables is well diversified
and that such diversification minimizes any potential credit risk.
Receivables are generally not collateralized.

Financial Instruments
The carrying amounts and estimated fair values of Enron’s financial
instruments, excluding trading activities which are marked to market, at
December 31, 1999 and 1998 were as follows:

(In millions)
Short- and long-term
debt (Note 7)
Company-obligated preferred
securities of subsidiaries
(Note 10)
Energy commodity price swaps
Interest rate swaps
Equity contracts

1999
Carrying Estimated
Amount Fair Value

1998
Carrying Estimated
Amount Fair Value

$8,152

$8,108

$7,357

$7,624

1,000
4

937
(3)
(55)
4

1,001
-

1,019
(5)
12
-

Enron uses the following methods and assumptions in estimating
fair values: (a) short- and long-term debt – the carrying amount of variable-rate debt approximates fair value, the fair value of marketable
debt is based on quoted market prices and the fair value of other debt
is based on the discounted present value of cash flows using Enron’s
current borrowing rates; (b) company-obligated preferred securities of
subsidiaries – the fair value is based on quoted market prices, where
available, or based on the discounted present value of cash flows using
Enron’s current borrowing rates if not publicly traded; and (c) energy
commodity price swaps, interest rate swaps and equity contracts – estimated fair values have been determined using available market data
and valuation methodologies. Judgment is necessarily required in interpreting market data and the use of different market assumptions or
estimation methodologies may affect the estimated fair value amounts.
The fair market value of cash and cash equivalents, trade and other
receivables, accounts payable and investments accounted for at fair
value are not materially different from their carrying amounts.
Guarantees of liabilities of unconsolidated entities and residual
value guarantees have no carrying value and fair values which are not
readily determinable (see Note 15).

49

4

MERCHANT ACTIVITIES

5

An analysis of the composition of Enron’s wholesale merchant investments and energy assets at December 31, 1999 and 1998 is as follows:

(In millions)
Merchant investments
Held directly by Enron(a)
Energy
Energy-intensive industries
Natural gas transportation
Other
Held through unconsolidated affiliates(b)
Energy
Power generation
Oil services
Other

Merchant assets(c)
Independent power plants
Natural gas transportation

Total

December 31,
1999
1998

$ 516
218
352
1,086

$ 279
331
132
334
1,076

401
98
25
88
612
1,698

610
123
50
783
1,859

152
35
187

148
38
186

$1,885

$2,045

The components of income before income taxes are as follows:
(In millions)
United States
Foreign

1999
$ 357
771
$1,128

Through the Enron Wholesale segment, Enron provides capital primarily to energy and communications-related businesses seeking debt or
equity financing. The merchant investments made by Enron and carried
at fair value include public and private equity, debt, production payments, government securities with maturities of more than 90 days and
interests in limited partnerships. The valuation methodologies utilize
market values of publicly-traded securities, independent appraisals and
cash flow analyses.
Also included in Enron’s wholesale business are investments in merchant assets such as power plants and natural gas pipelines, primarily
held through equity method investments. Some of these assets were
developed, constructed and operated by Enron. The merchant assets are
not expected to be long-term, integrated components of Enron’s energy
networks.
From time to time, Enron sells interests in these merchant assets
and investments. Some of these sales are completed in securitizations, in
which Enron retains certain interests through swaps associated with the
underlying assets. Such swaps are adjusted to fair value using quoted
market prices, if available, or estimated fair value based on management’s best estimate of the present value of future cash flow. These
swaps are included in Price Risk Management activities. See Note 3. For
the years ended December 31, 1999, 1998 and 1997, respectively, pre-tax
gains from sales of merchant assets and investments totaling $756 million, $628 million and $136 million are included in “Other Revenues,”
and proceeds were $2,217 million, $1,434 million and $339 million.

1998
$197
681
$878

1997
$ 96
(81)
$ 15

Total income tax expense (benefit) is summarized as follows:
(In millions)
Payable currently
Federal
State
Foreign
Payment deferred
Federal
State
Foreign
Total income tax expense (benefit)

(a) Investments are recorded at fair value in “Other Assets” with fair value adjustments
reflected in “Other Revenues.”
(b) Investments held through unconsolidated equity affiliates and recorded in “Investment
in and Advances to Unconsolidated Equity Affiliates” with earnings reflected in “Equity
in Earnings of Unconsolidated Equity Affiliates.” Amounts represent Enron’s interest.
(c) Amounts represent Enron’s investment in unconsolidated equity affiliates with earnings
reflected in “Equity in Earnings of Unconsolidated Equity Affiliates.”

50

INCOME TAXES

1999

1998

1997

$ 29
6
48
83

$ 30
8
50
88

$ 29
9
46
84

(159)
23
157
21
$ 104

(14)
11
90
87
$175

(39)
(42)
(93)
(174)
$ (90)

The differences between taxes computed at the U.S. federal statutory tax rate and Enron’s effective income tax rate are as follows:
(In millions, except percentages)
Statutory federal income
tax provision
Net state income taxes
Tight gas sands tax credit
Foreign tax rate differential
Equity earnings
Minority interests
Basis and stock sale differences
Cash value in life insurance
Goodwill amortization
Audit settlement related to Monthly
Income Preferred Shares
Other

1999

1998

1997

35.0%
1.8
(0.5)
(7.0)
(10.1)
0.8
(10.8)
(0.9)
1.6

35.0%
1.7
(1.4)
0.8
(4.3)
0.8
(14.2)
(1.1)
2.0

35.0%
(140.0)
(80.0)
13.3
(253.3)
186.7
(526.7)
(46.7)
60.0

(1.8)
1.1
9.2%

0.7
20.0%

153.4
23
(598.3)% $(90)

$ 5
(21)
(12)
2
(38)
28
(79)
(7)
9

The principal components of Enron’s net deferred income tax liability
are as follows:

(In millions)
Deferred income tax assets
Alternative minimum tax credit carryforward
Net operating loss carryforward
Other
Deferred income tax liabilities
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Price risk management activities
Other
Net deferred income tax liabilities(a)

December 31,
1999
1998
$ 220
1,302
188
1,710

$ 238
605
111
954

1,807
1,133
782
3,722
$2,012

1,940
645
700
3,285
$2,331

(a) Includes $118 million and $(26) million in other current liabilities for 1999 and 1998,
respectively.

Enron has an alternative minimum tax (AMT) credit carryforward
of approximately $220 million which can be used to offset regular
income taxes payable in future years. The AMT credit has an indefinite
carryforward period.
Enron has a federal consolidated net operating loss carryforward for
tax purposes of approximately $2.9 billion, which will begin to expire in
2011. Enron also has a net operating loss carryforward applicable to nonU.S. subsidiaries of approximately $874 million, of which $673 million can
be carried forward indefinitely. The remaining $201 million of net operating loss carryforward will begin to expire in 2002 but is projected to be
utilized before its expiration period. The benefits of the domestic and
foreign net operating losses have been recognized as deferred tax assets.
U.S. and foreign income taxes have been provided for earnings of
foreign subsidiary companies that are expected to be remitted to the
U.S. Foreign subsidiaries’ cumulative undistributed earnings of approximately $1.2 billion are considered to be indefinitely reinvested outside
the U.S. and, accordingly, no U.S. income taxes have been provided
thereon. In the event of a distribution of those earnings in the form of
dividends, Enron may be subject to both foreign withholding taxes and
U.S. income taxes net of allowable foreign tax credits.

6

SUPPLEMENTAL CASH FLOW INFORMATION

Cash paid for income taxes and interest expense, including fees
incurred on sales of accounts receivable, is as follows:
(In millions)
Income taxes (net of refunds)
Interest (net of amounts capitalized)

1999
$ 51
678

1998
$ 73
585

1997
$ 68
420

Non-Cash Activity
In December 1999, Enron and a third-party investor each contributed assets valued at approximately $500 million for interests in an Enroncontrolled limited partnership. See Note 8.
In June 1999, Enron entered into a series of transactions with a
third party, L JM Cayman, L.P., which resulted in an exchange of assets.
See Note 16.
During 1999, Enron received the rights to specific third-party fiber
optic cable in exchange for the rights on specific fiber optic cable held
for sale by Enron. These exchanges resulted in non-cash increases to
property, plant and equipment of $111 million.
During 1999, Enron issued approximately 7.6 million shares of common stock in connection with the acquisition, by an unconsolidated
equity affiliate, of interests in three power plants in New Jersey. During
1997, Enron issued common stock in connection with other business
acquisitions. See Note 2.
In December 1998, Enron extinguished its 6.25% Exchangeable
Notes with 10.5 million shares of EOG common stock.
Additionally, Enron’s investment in Jacaré has been consolidated
effective January 1, 1999 (see Note 2) and Whitewing Associates, L.P.
(Whitewing) and EOG are no longer consolidated by Enron (see Notes 9
and 2).

7

CREDIT FACILITIES AND DEBT

Enron has credit facilities with domestic and foreign banks which
provide for an aggregate of $1.0 billion in long-term committed credit
and $1.8 billion in short-term committed credit. Expiration dates of the
committed facilities range from April 2000 to November 2001. Interest
rates on borrowings are based upon the London Interbank Offered Rate,
certificate of deposit rates or other short-term interest rates. Certain credit

facilities contain covenants which must be met to borrow funds. Such debt
covenants are not anticipated to materially restrict Enron’s ability to
borrow funds under such facilities. Compensating balances are not
required, but Enron is required to pay a commitment or facility fee. At
December 31, 1999, no amounts were outstanding under these facilities.
Enron has also entered into agreements which provide for uncommitted lines of credit totaling $225 million at December 31, 1999. The
uncommitted lines have no stated expiration dates. Neither compensating balances nor commitment fees are required, as borrowings under
the uncommitted credit lines are available subject to agreement by the
participating banks. At December 31, 1999, $125 million was outstanding under the uncommitted lines.
In addition to borrowing from banks on a short-term basis, Enron
and certain of its subsidiaries sell commercial paper to provide financing
for various corporate purposes. As of December 31, 1999 and 1998,
short-term borrowings of $330 million and $680 million, respectively,
have been reclassified as long-term debt based upon the availability of
committed credit facilities with expiration dates exceeding one year and
management’s intent to maintain such amounts in excess of one year
subject to overall reductions in debt levels. Similarly, at December 31,
1999 and 1998, $670 million and $541 million, respectively, of long-term
debt due within one year remained classified as long-term. Weighted
average interest rates on short-term debt outstanding at December 31,
1999 and 1998 were 6.4% and 5.5%, respectively.
Detailed information on long-term debt is as follows:

(In millions)
Enron Corp.
Senior debentures
6.75% to 8.25% due 2005 to 2012
Notes payable
7.00% exchangeable notes due 2002
6.45% to 9.88% due 2001 to 2028
Floating rate notes due 1999 to 2004
Other
Northern Natural Gas Company
Notes payable
6.75% to 8.00% due 2005 to 2011
Transwestern Pipeline Company
Notes payable
7.55% to 9.20% due 2000 to 2004
Portland General
First mortgage bonds
6.47% to 9.46% due 1999 to 2023
Pollution control bonds
Various rates due 2010 to 2033
Other
Enron Oil & Gas Company
Notes payable various rates due 1999 to 2028
Other
Amount reclassified from short-term debt
Unamortized debt discount and premium
Total long-term debt

December 31,
1999
1998

$ 318

$ 350

239
4,209
329
34

3,342
400
38

500

500

142

147

398

502

200
150

200
160

356
330
(54)
$7,151

780
302
680
(44)
$7,357

The indenture securing Portland General’s First Mortgage Bonds
constitutes a direct first mortgage lien on substantially all electric utility
property and franchises, other than expressly excepted property.
The aggregate annual maturities of long-term debt outstanding at
December 31, 1999 were $670 million, $569 million, $432 million, $494
million and $493 million for 2000 through 2004, respectively.

51

8

MINORITY INTERESTS

9

Enron’s minority interests at December 31, 1999 and 1998 include
the following:
(In millions)
Majority-owned limited partnerships
Jacaré Electrical Distribution Trust
(see Note 2)
Enron Oil & Gas Company (see Note 2)
Whitewing Associates, L.P. (see Note 9)
Other

1999
$1,773
475
182
$2,430

UNCONSOLIDATED EQUITY AFFILIATES

Enron’s investment in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates
which are accounted for by the equity method is as follows:

1998
$ 750
596
500
297
$2,143

Enron has formed separate limited partnerships with third-party
investors for various purposes. These entities are included in Enron’s consolidated financial statements, with the third-party investors’ interests
reflected in “Minority Interests” in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
During 1999, third-party investors contributed cash and merchant
investments totaling $1.0 billion to Enron-sponsored entities to invest in
highly liquid investment grade securities (including Enron notes) and
short-term receivables. The merchant investments, totaling $500 million,
were sold prior to December 31, 1999.
In 1998, Enron formed a wholly-owned limited partnership for the
purpose of holding $1.6 billion of assets contributed by Enron. That partnership contributed $850 million of assets to a second newly-formed
limited partnership in exchange for a 53% interest; a third-party investor
contributed $750 million in exchange for a 47% interest. The assets held
by the wholly-owned limited partnership represent collateral for a $750
million note receivable held by the second limited partnership. In 1999,
the wholly-owned and second limited partnerships sold assets valued at
approximately $460 million and invested the proceeds in Enron notes.
Absent certain defaults or other specified events, Enron has the
option to acquire the minority holders’ interests in these partnerships. If
Enron does not acquire the minority holders’ interests before December
2004 through May 2009, or earlier upon certain specified events, the
entities will liquidate their assets and dissolve.

(In millions)
Azurix Corp.
Citrus Corp.
Companhia Distribuidora de Gas do Rio de
Janeiro, S.A.
Dabhol Power Company(a)
Enron Teesside Operations Limited
Jacaré Electrical Distribution Trust(a)
(see Note 2)
Joint Energy Development Investments L.P.
(JEDI)(b)

Net
Ownership
Interest
34%
50%

Joint Energy Development Investments II
L.P. (JEDI II)(b)
SK – Enron Co. Ltd.
Transportadora de Gas del Sur S.A.
Whitewing Associates, L.P.
Other

December 31,
1999
1998
$ 762
$ 918
480
455

25%
60%
50%

118
466
129

192
285
118

51%

-

447

50%

211

356

50%
50%
35%
50%

162
269
452
662
1,325
$5,036(c)

54
463
1,145
$4,433

(a) Accounted for under the equity method based on temporary control.
(b) JEDI and JEDI II account for their investments at fair value.
(c) At December 31, 1999 and 1998, the unamortized excess of Enron’s investment in
unconsolidated affiliates was $179 million and $203 million, respectively, which is being
amortized over the expected lives of the investments.

Enron’s equity in earnings (losses) of unconsolidated equity affiliates
is as follows:
(In millions)
Citrus Corp.
Dabhol Power Company
Joint Energy Development Investments L.P.
Joint Energy Development Investments II, L.P.
Transportadora de Gas del Sur S.A.
Other

1999
$ 25
30
11
92
32
119
$309

1998
$ 23
(45)
(4)
36
87
$ 97

1997
$ 27
68
45
76
$216

Summarized combined financial information of Enron’s unconsolidated affiliates is presented below:

(In millions)
Balance sheet
Current assets(a)
Property, plant and equipment, net
Other noncurrent assets
Current liabilities(a)
Long-term debt(a)
Other noncurrent liabilities
Owners’ equity

December 31,
1999
1998
$ 3,168
14,356
9,459
4,401
8,486
2,402
11,694

$ 2,309
12,640
7,176
3,501
7,621
2,016
8,987

(a) Includes $327 million and $196 million receivable from Enron and $84 million and $296
million payable to Enron at December 31, 1999 and 1998, respectively.

52

(In millions)
Income statement(a)
Operating revenues
Operating expenses
Net income
Distributions paid to Enron

1999

1998

1997

$11,568
9,449
1,857
482

$8,508
7,244
142
87

$11,183
10,246
336
118

(a) Enron recognized revenues from transactions with unconsolidated equity affiliates of
$161 million in 1999, $142 million in 1998 and $219 million in 1997.

In 1998, Enron, through a wholly-owned subsidiary, acquired
Wessex Water Plc (Wessex), which provides water supply and wastewater services in southern England, for approximately $2.4 billion. Wessex
is held through Azurix Corp. As a result of a financial restructuring in
late 1998 and a public offering in 1999, Enron has reduced its ownership
in Azurix to 34%.
In 1997, Enron and a third-party investor contributed approximately $579 million and $500 million, respectively, for interests in Whitewing.
Whitewing purchased 250,000 shares of Enron Series A Junior
Convertible Preferred Stock (Series A Preferred Stock) from Enron. In
March 1999, Whitewing was amended to allow, among other things,
control to be shared equally between Enron and the third-party investor.
Consequently, Whitewing was deconsolidated by Enron, resulting in an
increase in Enron’s investment in unconsolidated equity affiliates of
approximately $500 million, an increase in preferred stock of $1.0 billion
and a decrease in minority interests of $500 million. In September 1999,
Enron entered into a series of transactions that resulted in the restructuring of Whitewing, including the exchange of all outstanding shares
of Series A Preferred Stock held by Whitewing for 250,000 shares of
Enron Mandatorily Convertible Junior Preferred Stock, Series B (Series B
Preferred Stock) (see Note 10). In addition, Enron entered into a Share
Settlement Agreement under which Enron could be obligated, under
certain circumstances, to deliver additional shares of common stock or
Series B Preferred Stock to Whitewing for the amount that the market
price of the converted Enron common shares is less than $28 per share.
The number of shares of Series B Preferred Stock authorized equals the
number of shares necessary to satisfy Enron’s obligation under the Share
Settlement Agreement. Absent certain defaults or other specified
events, Enron has the option to acquire the outside investors’ interests.
If Enron does not acquire the outside investors’ interests before January
2003, or earlier upon certain specified events, Whitewing will liquidate
its assets and dissolve.
From time to time, Enron has entered into various administrative
service, management, construction, supply and operating agreements
with its unconsolidated equity affiliates. Enron’s management believes
that its existing agreements and transactions are reasonable compared
to those which could have been obtained from third parties.

10

PREFERRED STOCK

Preferred Stock
Following Enron’s reincorporation in Oregon on July 1, 1997, Enron
has authorized 16,500,000 shares of preferred stock, no par value. At
December 31, 1999, Enron had outstanding 1,296,184 shares of
Cumulative Second Preferred Convertible Stock (the Convertible
Preferred Stock), no par value. The Convertible Preferred Stock pays dividends at an amount equal to the higher of $10.50 per share or the
equivalent dividend that would be paid if shares of the Convertible
Preferred Stock were converted to common stock. Each share of the
Convertible Preferred Stock is convertible at any time at the option of
the holder thereof into 27.304 shares of Enron’s common stock, subject
to certain adjustments. The Convertible Preferred Stock is currently

subject to redemption at Enron’s option at a price of $100 per share plus
accrued dividends. During 1999, 1998 and 1997, 23,664 shares, 17,797
shares and 33,069 shares, respectively, of the Convertible Preferred Stock
were converted into common stock.
In September 1999, Enron entered into a series of transactions that
resulted in exchange of all outstanding shares of Series A Preferred
Stock held by Whitewing for 250,000 shares of Series B Preferred Stock
with a liquidation value of $1.0 billion. The Series B Preferred Stock pays
semi-annual cash dividends at an annual rate of 6.50%. Each share of
Series B Preferred Stock is mandatorily convertible into 200 shares of
Enron common stock on January 15, 2003 or earlier upon the occurrence
of certain events. See Note 9.
In connection with the Elektro and Wessex financings, which yielded
proceeds of approximately $1.6 billion (see Notes 2 and 9, respectively),
Enron committed to cause the sale of Enron convertible preferred stock,
with the number of common shares issuable upon conversion determined based on future common stock prices, if certain debt obligations
of the related entities acquiring such interests are defaulted upon, or in
certain events, including, among other things, Enron’s credit ratings
falling below specified levels. If the sale of stock were not sufficient
to retire such obligations, Enron would be liable for the shortfall. The
obligations will mature in December 2000 and 2001 for Elektro and
Wessex, respectively.

Company-Obligated Preferred Securities of Subsidiaries
Summarized information for Enron’s company-obligated preferred
securities of subsidiaries is as follows:

(In millions, except per
share amounts and shares)
Enron Capital LLC
8% Cumulative Guaranteed Monthly
Income Preferred Shares
(MIPS) (8,550,000 shares)(a)

December 31,
1999
1998

Liquidation
Value
Per Share

$ 214

$ 214

Enron Capital Trust I
8.3% Trust Originated Preferred Securities
(8,000,000 preferred securities)(a)

200

200

25

Enron Capital Trust II
8 1/8% Trust Originated Preferred Securities
(6,000,000 preferred securities)(a)

150

150

25

Enron Capital Trust III
Adjustable-Rate Capital Trust Securities
(200,000 preferred securities)(b)

200

200

1,000

Enron Equity Corp.
8.57% Preferred Stock (880 shares)(a)
7.39% Preferred Stock (150 shares)(a)(c)

88
15

88
15

100,000
100,000

Enron Capital Resources, L.P.
9% Cumulative Preferred Securities,
Series A (3,000,000
preferred securities)(a)

75

75

25

58
$1,000

59
$1,001

Other

$

25

(a) Redeemable under certain circumstances after specified dates.
(b) Mature in 2046.
(c) Mandatorily redeemable in 2006.

53

11

COMMON STOCK

Earnings Per Share
The computation of basic and diluted earnings per share is as follows:

(In millions, except per share amounts)
Numerator:
Basic
Income before cumulative effect
of accounting changes
Preferred stock dividends:
Second Preferred Stock
Series A Preferred Stock
Series B Preferred Stock
Income available to common shareholders before cumulative effect
of accounting changes
Cumulative effect of accounting
changes
Income available to common
share holders
Diluted
Income available to common shareholders before cumulative effect
of accounting changes
Effect of assumed conversion of
dilutive securities:
Second Preferred Stock(a)
Series A Preferred Stock(b)
Series B Preferred Stock(b)
Income before cumulative effect
of accounting changes
Cumulative effect of accounting
changes
Income available to common shareholders after assumed conversions
Denominator:
Denominator for basic earnings per
share – weighted-average shares
Effect of dilutive securities:
Preferred stock(a)
Stock options
Dilutive potential common shares
Denominator for diluted earnings per
share – adjusted weighted-average
shares and assumed conversions
Basic earnings per share:
Before cumulative effect of accounting
changes
Cumulative effect of accounting changes
Basic earnings per share
Diluted earnings per share
Before cumulative effect of accounting
changes
Cumulative effect of accounting changes
Diluted earnings per share

Year Ended December 31,
1999
1998
1997

Forward Contracts and Options
$1,024

$ 703

$ 105

(17)
(30)
(19)

(17)
-

(17)
-

958

686

88

(131)

-

-

$ 827

$ 686

$ 88

At December 31, 1999, Enron had forward contracts to purchase
22.6 million shares of Enron Corp. common stock, including approximately 12 million shares with JEDI, at an average price of $41.52 per
share. Enron may purchase the shares pursuant to the forward contracts
with cash or an equivalent value of Enron common stock until April
2001. Shares potentially deliverable to the counterparty under the contracts are assumed to be outstanding in calculating diluted earnings per
share unless they are antidilutive. At December 31, 1999, Enron also had
outstanding non-employee options to purchase 6.4 million shares of
Enron common stock at an exercise price of $19.59 per share.

Stock Option Plans

$ 958

$ 686

$ 88

17
-

17
-

-

975

703

88

(131)

-

-

$ 844

$ 703

$ 88

705

642

544

36
28
64

36
17
53

11
11

769

695

555

$ 1.36
(0.19)
$ 1.17

$1.07
$1.07

$0.16
$0.16

$ 1.27
(0.17)
$ 1.10

$1.01
$1.01

$0.16
$0.16

(a) For 1997, the dividends and conversion of preferred stock have been excluded from the
computation because the conversion is antidilutive.
(b) The Series A Preferred Stock and the Series B Preferred Stock were not included in the
calculation of diluted earnings per share because conversion of these shares would be
antidilutive (see Note 10).

54

On July 13, 1999, Enron announced a two-for-one common stock
split effective August 13, 1999, to shareholders of record July 23, 1999.
All share and per share amounts have been restated to reflect the stock
split, and appropriate adjustments have been made in market prices of
stock, conversion ratios of shares of convertible preferred stock and
exercise price and number of shares subject to stock options. Effective
with the stock split, the annual cash dividend rate on the common stock
is $0.50 per share.

Enron applies Accounting Principles Board (APB) Opinion 25 and
related interpretations in accounting for its stock option plans. In accordance with APB Opinion 25, no compensation expense has been recognized for the fixed stock option plans. Compensation expense charged
against income for the restricted stock plan for 1999, 1998 and 1997 was
$131 million, $58 million and $14 million, respectively. Had compensation
cost for Enron’s stock option compensation plans been determined based
on the fair value at the grant dates for awards under those plans, Enron’s
net income and earnings per share would have been $827 million ($1.08
per share basic, $1.01 per share diluted) in 1999, $674 million ($1.02 per
share basic, $0.97 per share diluted) in 1998 and $66 million ($0.09 per
share basic, $0.09 per share diluted) in 1997.
The fair value of each option grant is estimated on the date of
grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model with weightedaverage assumptions for grants in 1999, 1998 and 1997, respectively: (i)
dividend yield of 2.4%, 2.5% and 2.5%; (ii) expected volatility of 20.0%,
18.3% and 17.4%; (iii) risk-free interest rates of 5.6%, 5.0% and 5.9%;
and (iv) expected lives of 3.7 years, 3.8 years and 3.7 years.
Enron has four fixed option plans (the Plans) under which options
for shares of Enron’s common stock have been or may be granted to officers, employees and non-employee members of the Board of Directors.
Options granted may be either incentive stock options or nonqualified
stock options and are granted at not less than the fair market value of
the stock at the time of grant. The Plans provide for options to be granted with a stock appreciation rights feature; however, Enron does not
presently intend to issue options with this feature. Under the Plans,
Enron may grant options with a maximum term of 10 years. Options vest
under varying schedules.

Summarized information for Enron’s Plans is as follows:
1999

(Shares in thousands)
Outstanding, beginning of year
Granted
Exercised
Forfeited
Expired
Outstanding, end of year
Exercisable, end of year
Available for grant, end of year(a)

Shares
79,604
35,118
(19,705)
(1,465)
(21)
93,531
52,803
24,864

Weighted average fair value of options granted

1998
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price
$19.60
37.49
18.08
24.51
18.79
26.74
22.56

Shares
78,858
15,702
(13,072)
(1,498)
(386)
79,604
45,942
10,498

1997
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price
$17.89
24.99
15.70
19.77
19.76
19.60
$18.16

$ 7.24

Shares
50,952
35,316
(4,330)
(3,028)
(52)
78,858
42,504
26,094

$ 4.20

Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price
$16.35
19.32
11.65
17.63
17.30
17.89
$16.78
$ 3.55

(a) Includes up to 22,140,962 shares, 10,497,670 shares and 24,492,080 shares as of December 31, 1999, 1998 and 1997, respectively, which may be issued either as restricted stock or
pursuant to stock options.

The following table summarizes information about stock options outstanding at December 31, 1999 (shares in thousands):

Range of Exercise Prices
$ 6.58 to $18.03
18.38 to 19.94
20.00 to 22.50
23.19 to 28.72
30.03 to 50.48

Options Outstanding
Weighted
Average
Number
Remaining
Outstanding
Contractual
at 12/31/99
Life
13,327
3.7
14,477
5.4
20,806
5.1
10,687
7.7
34,234
7.3
93,531
6.1

Restricted Stock Plan
Under Enron’s Restricted Stock Plan, participants may be granted
stock without cost to the participant. The shares granted under this plan
vest to the participants at various times ranging from immediate vesting
to vesting at the end of a five-year period. Upon vesting, the shares are
released to the participants. The following summarizes shares of
restricted stock under this plan:
(Shares in thousands)
Outstanding, beginning of year
Granted
Released to participants
Forfeited
Outstanding, end of year
Available for grant, end of year
Weighted average fair value of
restricted stock granted

12

1999
6,034
2,672
(1,702)
(223)
6,781
22,141

1998
5,074
2,122
(1,064)
(98)
6,034
10,498

1997
1,650
4,176
(642)
(110)
5,074
24,492

$37.38

$23.70

$19.13

PENSION AND OTHER BENEFITS

Enron maintains a retirement plan (the Enron Plan) which is a noncontributory defined benefit plan covering substantially all employees in
the United States and certain employees in foreign countries. The benefit accrual is in the form of a cash balance of 5% of annual base pay.
Portland General has a noncontributory defined benefit pension
plan (the Portland General Plan) covering substantially all of its employees. Benefits under the Plan are based on years of service, final average
pay and covered compensation.

Options Exercisable
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price
$14.90
18.90
21.10
26.65
38.12
$26.74

Number
Exercisable
at 12/31/99
13,130
10,969
14,555
4,480
9,669
52,803

Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price
$14.88
18.97
21.17
26.67
37.24
$22.56

Enron also maintains a noncontributory employee stock ownership
plan (ESOP) which covers all eligible employees. Allocations to individual employees’ retirement accounts within the ESOP offset a portion of
benefits earned under the Enron Plan. All shares included in the ESOP
have been allocated to the employee accounts. At December 31, 1999
and 1998, 17,241,731 shares and 21,838,100 shares, respectively, of
Enron common stock were held by the ESOP, a portion of which may be
used to offset benefits under the Enron Plan.
Assets of the Enron Plan and the Portland General Plan are comprised primarily of equity securities, fixed income securities and temporary cash investments. It is Enron’s policy to fund all pension costs
accrued to the extent required by federal tax regulations.
Enron provides certain postretirement medical, life insurance and
dental benefits to eligible employees and their eligible dependents.
Benefits are provided under the provisions of contributory defined
dollar benefit plans. Enron is currently funding that portion of its obligations under these postretirement benefit plans which are expected
to be recoverable through rates by its regulated pipelines and electric
utility operations.
Enron accrues these postretirement benefit costs over the service
lives of the employees expected to be eligible to receive such benefits.
Enron is amortizing the transition obligation which existed at January 1,
1993 over a period of approximately 19 years.
The following table sets forth information related to changes in the
benefit obligations, changes in plan assets, a reconciliation of the funded status of the plans and components of the expense recognized related to Enron’s pension and other postretirement plans:

55

(In millions)
Change in benefit obligation
Benefit obligation, beginning of year
Service cost
Interest cost
Plan participants’ contributions
Plan amendments
Actuarial loss (gain)
Acquisitions and divestitures
Effect of curtailment and settlements(a)
Benefits paid
Benefit obligation, end of year
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets, beginning
of year(b)

Pension Benefits Other Benefits
1999
1998
1999
1998
$687
32
49
6
(51)
36
(8)
(43)
$708

$617
27
44
26
(27)
$687

$134
2
9
3
(12)
(16)
$120

$148
2
9
3
3
(16)
(15)
$134

$774
80
37
5
(43)
$853

$727
41
33
(27)
$774

$ 60
7
6
3
(8)
$ 68

$ 54
3
8
3
(8)
$ 60

Reconciliation of funded status, end of year
Funded status, end of year
$145
(13)
Unrecognized transition obligation (asset)
Unrecognized prior service cost
32
Unrecognized net actuarial loss (gain)
11
Prepaid (accrued) benefit cost
$175

$ 87
(18)
33
79
$181

$ (52)
48
14
(29)
$ (19)

$ (74)
58
17
(10)
$ (9)

Weighted-average assumptions
at December 31
Discount rate
Expected return on plan assets (pre-tax)
Rate of compensation increase

7.75%
(c)
(e)

6.75%
(c)
(e)

7.75% 6.75%
(d)
(d)
(e)
(e)

$ 32
49
(70)

$ 27
44
(63)

$

(6)
5
3
(6)
$ 7

(6)
5
2
$ 9

4
1
6
$ 18

Actual return on plan assets
Acquisitions and divestitures
Employer contribution
Plan participants’ contributions
Benefits paid
Fair value of plan assets, end of year(b)

Components of net periodic benefit cost
Service cost
Interest cost
Expected return on plan assets
Amortization of transition obligation
(asset)
Amortization of prior service cost
Recognized net actuarial loss (gain)
Effect of curtailment and settlements(a)
Net periodic benefit cost

2
9
(4)

$

2
9
(3)

4
1
$ 13

(a) Represents one-time nonrecurring events associated with the exchange and sale of EOG
(see Note 2) and with certain employees ceasing participation in the Portland General
Plan as a result of union negotiations.
(b) Includes plan assets of the ESOP of $121 million and $139 million at December 31, 1999
and 1998, respectively.
(c) Long-term rate of return on assets is assumed to be 10.5% for the Enron Plan and 9.0%
for the Portland General Plan.
(d) Long-term rate of return on assets is assumed to be 7.5% for the Enron assets and 9.5%
for the Portland General assets.
(e) Rate of compensation increase is assumed to be 4.0% for the Enron Plan and 4.0% to
9.5% for the Portland General Plan.

Included in the above amounts are the unfunded obligations for
the supplemental executive retirement plans. At December 31, 1999 and
1998, respectively, the projected benefit obligation for these unfunded
plans was $56 million and $57 million and the fair value of assets was $1
million and $2 million.
The measurement date of the Enron Plan and the ESOP is
September 30, and the measurement date of the Portland General Plan
and the postretirement benefit plans is December 31. The funded status

56

as of the valuation date of the Enron Plan, the Portland General Plan,
the ESOP and the postretirement benefit plans reconciles with the
amount detailed above which is included in “Other Assets” on the
Consolidated Balance Sheet.
For measurement purposes, 6% and 10% annual rates of increase in
the per capita cost of covered health care benefits were assumed in 2000
for the Enron and Portland General postretirement plans, respectively.
The rates were assumed to decrease to 5% by 2001 and 2010 for the
Enron and Portland General postretirement plans, respectively. Assumed
health care cost trend rates have a significant effect on the amounts
reported for the health care plans. A one-percentage-point change in
assumed health care cost trend rates would have the following effects:
1-Percentage
(In millions)
Point Increase
Effect on total of service and
interest cost components
$0.4
Effect on postretirement benefit obligation
$5.2

1-Percentage
Point Decrease
$(0.3)
$(4.7)

Additionally, certain Enron subsidiaries maintain various incentive
based compensation plans for which participants may receive a combination of cash or stock options of the subsidiaries, based upon the
achievement of certain performance goals.

13

RATES AND REGULATORY ISSUES

Rates and regulatory issues related to certain of Enron’s natural gas
pipelines and its electric utility operations are subject to final determination by various regulatory agencies. The domestic interstate pipeline
operations are regulated by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
(FERC) and the electric utility operations are regulated by the FERC and
the Oregon Public Utility Commission (OPUC). As a result, these operations are subject to the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting
Standards (SFAS) No. 71, “Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of
Regulation,” which recognizes the economic effects of regulation and,
accordingly, Enron has recorded regulatory assets and liabilities related
to such operations.
The regulated pipelines operations’ net regulatory assets were $250
million and $241 million at December 31, 1999 and 1998, respectively,
and are expected to be recovered over varying time periods.
The electric utility operations’ net regulatory assets were $494 million at December 31, 1999 and 1998. Based on rates in place at
December 31, 1999, Enron estimates that it will collect substantially all
of its regulatory assets within the next 12 years.

Pipeline Operations
On May 1, 1998, Northern Natural Gas Company (Northern) filed a
general rate case proceeding with the FERC which fulfilled a commitment made in a previous settlement. The FERC accepted the rate case for
filing and suspended the filed rates. Northern implemented the filed
rates effective November 1, 1998, subject to refund. An uncontested
Stipulation and Agreement of Settlement (Settlement) was filed with
the Commission on April 16, 1999 and an order approving the
Settlement was issued by the Commission on June 18, 1999. Northern
issued refunds on September 1, 1999. Northern effectuated new rates,
which reflected seasonality, on November 1, 1999.
On November 1, 1999, Transwestern Pipeline Company implemented a rate escalation of settled transportation rates in accordance with its
May 1995 global settlement, as amended in May 1996.

Electric Utility Operations
PGE is a 67.5% owner of the Trojan Nuclear Plant (Trojan). In March
1995, the OPUC issued an order authorizing PGE to recover all of the
estimated costs of decommissioning Trojan and 87% of its remaining
investment in the plant. At December 31, 1999, PGE’s regulatory asset
related to recovery of Trojan costs from customers was $398 million.
Amounts are to be collected over Trojan’s original license period ending
in 2011. An effort is being made to negate new legislation allowing
PGE’s recovery of a return on its undepreciated investment in Trojan, and
a referendum will appear on the November 2000 ballot. See Note 14.
Enron believes, based upon its experience to date and after considering appropriate reserves that have been established, that the ultimate
resolution of pending regulatory matters will not have a material impact
on Enron’s financial position or results of operations.

14

LITIGATION AND OTHER CONTINGENCIES

Enron is a party to various claims and litigation, the significant items
of which are discussed below. Although no assurances can be given, Enron
believes, based on its experience to date and after considering appropriate reserves that have been established, that the ultimate resolution of
such items, individually or in the aggregate, will not have a material
adverse impact on Enron’s financial position or its results of operations.

Litigation
In 1995, several parties (the Plaintiffs) filed suit in Harris County
District Court in Houston, Texas, against Intratex Gas Company (Intratex),
Houston Pipe Line Company and Panhandle Gas Company (collectively,
the Enron Defendants), each of which is a wholly-owned subsidiary of
Enron. The Plaintiffs were either sellers or royalty owners under numerous gas purchase contracts with Intratex, many of which have terminated. Early in 1996, the case was severed by the Court into two matters to
be tried (or otherwise resolved) separately. In the first matter, the
Plaintiffs alleged that the Enron Defendants committed fraud and negligent misrepresentation in connection with the “Panhandle program,”
a special marketing program established in the early 1980s. This case was
tried in October 1996 and resulted in a verdict for the Enron Defendants.
In the second matter, the Plaintiffs allege that the Enron Defendants violated state regulatory requirements and certain gas purchase contracts
by failing to take the Plaintiffs’ gas ratably with other producers’ gas at
certain times between 1978 and 1988. The trial court has certified a class
action with respect to ratability claims. On April 30, 1999, the Texas
Supreme Court granted Enron’s petition for review and agreed to consider Enron’s appeal of the class certification. The Enron Defendants
deny the Plaintiffs’ claims and have asserted various affirmative defenses, including the statute of limitations. The Enron Defendants believe
that they have strong legal and factual defenses, and intend to vigorously contest the claims. Although no assurances can be given, Enron
believes that the ultimate resolution of these matters will not have a
material adverse effect on its financial position or results of operations.
On November 21, 1996, an explosion occurred in or around the
Humberto Vidal Building in San Juan, Puerto Rico. The explosion resulted in fatalities, bodily injuries and damage to the building and surrounding property. San Juan Gas Company, Inc. (San Juan), an Enron subsidiary, operated a propane/air distribution system in the vicinity.
Although San Juan did not provide service to the building, the National
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) concluded that the probable cause
of the incident was propane leaking from San Juan’s distribution system.
San Juan and Enron strongly disagree. The NTSB found no path of migration of propane from San Juan’s system to the building and no forensic
evidence that propane fueled the explosion. Enron, San Juan, and four

San Juan affiliates have been named, along with several third parties, as
defendants in numerous lawsuits filed in U.S. District Court for the district of Puerto Rico and the Superior Court of Puerto Rico. These suits,
which seek damages for wrongful death, personal injury, business interruption and property damage, allege that negligence of Enron, San Juan
and its affiliates, among others, caused the explosion. Enron, San Juan
and its affiliates are vigorously contesting the claims. Although no assurances can be given, Enron believes that the ultimate resolution of these
matters will not have a material adverse effect on its financial position
or results of operations.

Trojan Investment Recovery
In early 1993, PGE ceased commercial operation of Trojan. In April
1996 a circuit court judge in Marion County, Oregon, found that the
OPUC could not authorize PGE to collect a return on its undepreciated
investment in Trojan, contradicting a November 1994 ruling from the
same court. The ruling was the result of an appeal of PGE’s March 1995
general rate order which granted PGE recovery of, and a return on, 87%
of its remaining investment in Trojan. The 1994 ruling was appealed to
the Oregon Court of Appeals and was stayed pending the appeal of the
OPUC’s March 1995 order. Both PGE and the OPUC have separately
appealed the April 1996 ruling, which appeals were combined with the
appeal of the November 1994 ruling at the Oregon Court of Appeals. On
June 24, 1998, the Court of Appeals of the State of Oregon ruled that
the OPUC does not have the authority to allow PGE to recover a rate of
return on its undepreciated investment in the Trojan generating facility.
The court upheld the OPUC’s authorization of PGE’s recovery of its undepreciated investment in Trojan.
PGE and the OPUC each filed petitions for review with the Oregon
Supreme Court. On August 26, 1998, the Utility Reform Project filed a
petition for review with the Oregon Supreme Court seeking review of
that portion of the Oregon Court of Appeals decision relating to PGE’s
recovery of its undepreciated investment in Trojan. On April 29, 1999,
the Oregon Supreme Court accepted the petitions for review. On June
16, 1999, Oregon House Bill 3220 authorizing the OPUC to allow recovery
of a return on the undepreciated investment in property retired from
service was signed. One of the effects of the bill is to affirm retroactively
the OPUC’s authority to allow PGE’s recovery of a return on its undepreciated investment in the Trojan generating facility.
Relying on the new legislation, on July 2, 1999, PGE requested the
Oregon Supreme Court to vacate the June 24, 1998, adverse ruling of the
Oregon Court of Appeals, affirm the validity of the OPUC’s order allowing PGE to recover a return on its undepreciated investment in Trojan and
to reverse its decision accepting the Utility Reform Project’s petition for
review. The Utility Reform Project and the Citizens Utility Board, another
party to the proceeding, opposed such request and submitted to the
Oregon Secretary of State sufficient signatures in support of placing a referendum to negate the new legislation on the November 2000 ballot.
The Oregon Supreme Court has indicated it will defer hearing the matter
until after the November 2000 elections. Enron cannot predict the outcome
of these actions. Additionally, due to uncertainties in the regulatory process,
management cannot predict, with certainty, what ultimate rate-making
action the OPUC will take regarding PGE’s recovery of a rate of return on
its Trojan investment. Although no assurances can be given, Enron
believes that the ultimate resolution of these matters will not have a
material adverse effect on its financial position or results of operations.

57

Environmental Matters
Enron is subject to extensive federal, state and local environmental
laws and regulations. These laws and regulations require expenditures
in connection with the construction of new facilities, the operation of
existing facilities and for remediation at various operating sites. The
implementation of the Clean Air Act Amendments is expected to result
in increased operating expenses. These increased operating expenses are
not expected to have a material impact on Enron’s financial position or
results of operations.
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has informed Enron
that it is a potentially responsible party at the Decorah Former
Manufactured Gas Plant Site (the Decorah Site) in Decorah, Iowa, pursuant to the provisions of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA, also commonly known as
Superfund). The manufactured gas plant in Decorah ceased operations in
1951. A predecessor company of Enron purchased the Decorah Site in
1963. Enron’s predecessor did not operate the gas plant and sold the
Decorah Site in 1965. The EPA alleges that hazardous substances were
released to the environment during the period in which Enron’s predecessor owned the site, and that Enron’s predecessor assumed the liabilities of the company that operated the plant. Enron contests these allegations. To date, the EPA has identified no other potentially responsible
parties with respect to this site. Under the terms of administrative orders,
Enron replaced affected topsoil and removed impacted subsurface soils in
certain areas of the tract where the plant was formerly located. Enron
completed the final removal actions at the site in November 1998 and
concluded all remaining site activities in the spring of 1999. Enron submitted a final report on the work conducted at the site to the EPA. Enron
does not expect to incur material expenditures in connection with this
site.
Enron also received from the EPA an Order issued under CERCLA
alleging that Enron and two other parties are responsible for the cost of
demolition and proper disposal of two 110 foot towers that apparently
had been used in the manufacture of carbon dioxide at a site called the
“City Bumper Site” in Cincinnati, Ohio. The carbon dioxide plant, according to agency documents, was in operation from 1926 to 1966. Houston
Natural Gas Corporation, a predecessor of Enron Corp., merged with
Liquid Carbonic Industries (LCI) on January 31, 1969. Liquid Carbonic
Corporation (LCC), a subsidiary of LCI, had title to the site. Twenty-eight
days after the merger, on February 28, 1969, the site was sold to a third
party. In 1984, LCC was sold to an unaffiliated party in a stock sale.
Although Enron does not admit liability with respect to any costs at this
site, it agreed to cooperate with the EPA and other potentially responsible parties to undertake the work contemplated by the EPA’s Order. The
tower demolition and removal activities were completed in October
1998, and a final project report has been submitted to the EPA. The EPA
has confirmed through correspondence that all activities required by the
order are complete.
Enron’s natural gas pipeline companies conduct soil and ground
water remediation on a number of their facilities. Enron does not expect
to incur material expenditures in connection with soil and groundwater
remediation.

58

15

COMMITMENTS

Firm Transportation Obligations
Enron has firm transportation agreements with various joint venture pipelines. Under these agreements, Enron must make specified
minimum payments each month. At December 31, 1999, the estimated
aggregate amounts of such required future payments were $65 million,
$68 million, $69 million, $70 million and $74 million for 2000 through
2004, respectively, and $515 million for later years.
The costs recognized under firm transportation agreements, including commodity charges on actual quantities shipped, totaled $55 million, $30 million and $27 million in 1999, 1998 and 1997, respectively.
Enron has assigned firm transportation contracts with two of its joint
ventures to third parties and guaranteed minimum payments under the
contracts averaging approximately $36 million annually through 2001
and $3 million in 2002.

Other Commitments
Enron leases property, operating facilities and equipment under
various operating leases, certain of which contain renewal and purchase
options and residual value guarantees. Future commitments related to
these items at December 31, 1999 were $266 million, $88 million, $78
million, $53 million and $48 million for 2000 through 2004, respectively,
and $370 million for later years. Guarantees under the leases total $715
million at December 31, 1999.
Total rent expense incurred during 1999, 1998 and 1997 was $143
million, $147 million and $156 million, respectively.
In November 1999, a subsidiary of Enron made a contribution leaseback of assets in return for a preferred interest in an unconsolidated
equity affiliate of Enron. As a result of this transaction, Enron has net
future obligations of $5 million each year for 2000 through 2004 and $49
million thereafter.
Enron guarantees the performance of certain of its unconsolidated
equity affiliates in connection with letters of credit issued on behalf of
those entities. At December 31, 1999, a total of $303 million of such
guarantees were outstanding, including $144 million on behalf of EOTT.
In addition, Enron is a guarantor on certain liabilities of unconsolidated
equity affiliates and other companies totaling approximately $1,501 million at December 31, 1999, including $427 million related to EOTT trade
obligations. The EOTT letters of credit and guarantees of trade obligations are secured by the assets of EOTT. Enron has also guaranteed $420
million in lease obligations for which it has been indemnified by an
“Investment Grade” company. Management does not consider it likely
that Enron would be required to perform or otherwise incur any losses
associated with the above guarantees. In addition, certain commitments
have been made related to capital expenditures and equity investments
planned in 2000.

16

RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS

In June 1999, Enron entered into a series of transactions involving
a third party and L JM Cayman, L.P. (L JM). L JM is a private investment
company which engages in acquiring or investing in primarily energyrelated investments. A senior officer of Enron is the managing member
of L JM’s general partner. The effect of the transactions was (i) Enron and
the third party amended certain forward contracts to purchase shares of
Enron common stock, resulting in Enron having forward contracts to
purchase Enron common shares at the market price on that day, (ii) L JM
received 6.8 million shares of Enron common stock subject to certain
restrictions and (iii) Enron received a note receivable and certain financial instruments hedging an investment held by Enron. Enron recorded
the assets received and equity issued at estimated fair value. In connection with the transactions, L JM agreed that the Enron officer would
have no pecuniary interest in such Enron common shares and would be
restricted from voting on matters related to such shares. L JM repaid the
note receivable in December 1999.
L JM2 Co-Investment, L.P. (L JM2) was formed in December 1999 as
a private investment company which engages in acquiring or investing
in primarily energy-related or communications-related businesses. In the
fourth quarter of 1999, L JM2, which has the same general partner as
L JM, acquired, directly or indirectly, approximately $360 million of merchant assets and investments from Enron, on which Enron recognized
pre-tax gains of approximately $16 million. In December 1999, L JM2
entered into an agreement to acquire Enron’s interests in an unconsolidated equity affiliate for approximately $34 million. Additionally, L JM
acquired other assets from Enron for $11 million.
At December 31, 1999, JEDI held approximately 12 million shares of
Enron Corp. common stock. The value of the Enron Corp. common stock
has been hedged. In addition, an officer of Enron has invested in the limited partner of JEDI and from time to time acts as agent on behalf of the
limited partner’s management.
In 1999, Whitewing acquired approximately $192 million of merchant assets from Enron. Enron recognized no gains or losses in connection with these transactions.
Management believes that the terms of the transactions with related parties are representative of terms that would be negotiated with
unrelated third parties.

17

18

ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS

Cumulative Effect of Accounting Changes
In the first quarter of 1999, Enron recorded an after-tax charge of
$131 million to reflect the initial adoption (as of January 1, 1999) of two
new accounting pronouncements. In 1998, the AICPA issued Statement of
Position 98-5 (SOP 98-5), “Reporting on the Costs of Start-Up Activities,”
which requires that costs for all start-up activities and organization costs
be expensed as incurred and not capitalized in certain instances, as had
previously been allowed. Also in 1998, the Emerging Issues Task Force
reached consensus on Issue No. 98-10, “Accounting for Contracts Involved
in Energy Trading and Risk Management Activities,” requiring energy
trading contracts, including energy transportation contracts, to be
recorded at fair value on the balance sheet, with the changes in fair value
included in earnings. The first quarter 1999 charge was primarily related
to the adoption of SOP 98-5.

Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In 1998, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued SFAS
No. 133, “Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities.”
SFAS No. 133 establishes accounting and reporting standards requiring that every derivative instrument (including certain derivative
instruments embedded in other contracts) be recorded on the balance
sheet as either an asset or liability measured at its fair value. The
statement requires that changes in the derivative’s fair value be recognized currently in earnings unless specific hedge accounting criteria
are met. Special accounting for qualifying hedges allows a derivative’s
gains and losses to offset related results on the hedged item in the
income statement, and requires that a company must formally document, designate and assess the effectiveness of transactions that
receive hedge accounting.
In June 1999, the FASB issued SFAS No. 137, which deferred the
effective date of SFAS No. 133 to fiscal years beginning after June 15,
2000. A company may implement SFAS No. 133 as of the beginning of
any fiscal quarter after issuance, however, the statement cannot be
applied retroactively. Enron does not plan to early adopt SFAS No. 133.
Enron believes that SFAS No. 133 will not have a material impact on its
accounting for price risk management activities but has not yet quantified the effect on its hedging activities or physical based contracts.

ASSET IMPAIRMENT

Continued significant changes in state and federal rules regarding
the use of MTBE as a gasoline additive have significantly impacted
Enron’s view of the future prospects for this business. As a result, Enron
completed a reevaluation of its position and strategy with respect to its
operated MTBE assets which resulted in (i) the purchase of certain previously-leased MTBE related assets, under provisions within the lease, in
order to facilitate future actions, including the potential disposal of such
assets and (ii) a review of all MTBE-related assets for impairment considering the recent adverse changes and their impact on recoverability.
Based on this review and disposal discussions with market participants,
in September 1999, Enron recorded a $441 million pre-tax charge for the
impairment of its MTBE-related assets.

59

19

QUARTERLY FINANCIAL DATA (Unaudited)
Summarized quarterly financial data is as follows:

(In millions, except
per share amounts)
1999
Revenues
Income before interest, minority
interests and income taxes
Net income
Earnings per share:
Basic
Diluted
1998
Revenues
Income before interest, minority
interests and income taxes
Net income
Earnings per share:
Basic
Diluted

First
Quarter

Second
Quarter

Third
Quarter

Fourth
Quarter

$7,632

$9,672

$11,835

$10,973

$40,112

533
122

469
222

520
290

473
259

1,995
893

$ 0.17
0.16

$ 0.29
0.27

$

$5,682

$6,557

$11,320

$ 7,701

$31,260

471
214

345
145

405
168

361
176

1,582
703

$ 0.34
0.32

$ 0.22
0.21

$

0.38
0.35

0.25
0.24

$

$

Total
Year(a)

0.33
0.31

$

0.26
0.25

1.17
1.10

$

1.07
1.01

(a) The sum of earnings per share for the four quarters may not equal earnings per share for the total year due to changes in the average number of common shares outstanding.

20

GEOGRAPHIC AND BUSINESS SEGMENT INFORMATION

Enron’s business is divided into operating segments, defined as
components of an enterprise about which financial information is available and evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker, or
decision-making group, in deciding how to allocate resources to an individual segment and in assessing performance of the segment. Enron’s
chief operating decision-making group is the Office of the Chairman,
which consists of the Chairman, President and Vice Chairman.
Enron’s chief operating decision-making group evaluates performance and allocates resources based on income before interest, minority interests and income taxes (IBIT) as well as on net income. However,
interest on corporate debt is primarily maintained at Corporate and is
not allocated to the segments. Therefore, management believes that
IBIT is the dominant measurement of segment profits consistent with
Enron’s consolidated financial statements. The accounting policies of the
segments are substantially the same as those described in the summary
of significant accounting policies in Note 1.
Enron has divided its operations into the following reportable segments, based on similarities in economic characteristics, products and
services, types of customers, methods of distributions and regulatory
environment.
Transportation and Distribution – Regulated industries. Interstate
transmission of natural gas. Management and operation of pipelines.
Electric utility operations.
Wholesale Energy Operations and Services – Energy commodity sales
and services, risk management products and financial services to wholesale
customers. Development, acquisition and operation of power plants, natural gas pipelines and other energy-related and communications assets
including broadband services.
Retail Energy Services – Sales of natural gas and electricity directly
to end-use customers, particularly in the commercial and industrial sectors, including the outsourcing of energy-related activities.
Exploration and Production – Natural gas and crude oil exploration
and production primarily in the United States, Canada, Trinidad and
India until August 16, 1999. See Note 2.

60

Corporate and Other – Includes operation of water and renewable
energy businesses as well as clean fuels plants.
Financial information by geographic and business segment follows
for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 1999.

Geographic Segments

(In millions)
Operating revenues from
unaffiliated customers
United States
Foreign
Income (loss) before interest,
minority interests and income taxes
United States
Foreign
Long-lived assets
United States
Foreign

Year Ended December 31,
1999
1998
1997

$30,176
9,936
$40,112

$25,247
6,013
$31,260

$17,328
2,945
$20,273

$ 1,273
722
$ 1,995

$ 1,008
574
$ 1,582

$

$ 8,286
2,395
$10,681

$ 9,382
1,275
$10,657

$ 8,425
745
$ 9,170

$

601
(36)
565

Business Segments

(In millions)
1999
Unaffiliated revenues(a)
Intersegment revenues(b)
Total revenues
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Operating income (loss)
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated equity affiliates
Gains on sales of assets and investments
Interest income
Other income, net
Income (loss) before interest, minority
interests and income taxes
Capital expenditures
Identifiable assets
Investments in and advances to
unconsolidated equity affiliates
Total assets
1998
Unaffiliated revenues(a)
Intersegment revenues(b)
Total revenues
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Operating income (loss)
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated equity affiliates
Gains on sales of assets and investments
Interest income
Other income, net
Income (loss) before interest, minority
interests and income taxes
Capital expenditures
Identifiable assets
Investments in and advances to
unconsolidated equity affiliates
Total assets
1997
Unaffiliated revenues(a)
Intersegment revenues(b)
Total revenues
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Operating income (loss)
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated equity affiliates
Gains on sales of assets and investments
Interest income
Other income, net
Income (loss) before interest, minority
interests and income taxes
Capital expenditures
Identifiable assets
Investments in and advances to
unconsolidated equity affiliates
Total assets

Transportation
and
Distribution

Wholesale
Energy
Operations
and Services

Retail
Energy
Services

Exploration
and
Production(c)

$2,013
19
2,032
246
551
50
19
20
45

$35,501
786
36,287
294
889
237
11
126
54

$1,518
289
1,807
29
(81)
5
8

$ 429
97
526
213
66
(1)

685
316
7,148

1,317
1,216
18,501

(68)
64
956

811
$7,959

2,684
$21,185

$ 956

$

$1,833
16
1,849
253
562
33
31
9
2

$27,220
505
27,725
195
880
42
4
67
(25)

$1,072
1,072
31
(124)
(2)
7

$ 750
134
884
315
133
1
(6)

637
310
6,955

968
706
12,205

(119)
75
747

661
$7,616

2,632
$14,837

$1,402
14
1,416
160
398
40
120
8
14

Corporate
and
Other(d)
$

Total

651
(1,191)
(540)
88
(623)
22
511
11
75

$40,112
40,112
870
802
309
541
162
181

65
226
-

(4)
541
1,740

1,995
2,363
28,345

-

1,541
$ 3,281

5,036
$33,381

$

385
(655)
(270)
33
(73)
24
21
11
(15)

$31,260
31,260
827
1,378
97
56
88
(37)

128
690
3,001

(32)
124
2,009

1,582
1,905
24,917

$ 747

$3,001

1,140
$ 3,149

4,433
$29,350

$17,344
678
18,022
133
376
172
(1)
57
50

$ 683
2
685
7
(105)
(1)
(1)

$ 789
108
897
278
185
1
(3)

$

$20,273
20,273
600
15
216
186
70
78

580

654

(107)

183

(745)

565

337
7,115

318
8,661

36
322

626
2,668

75
1,130

1,392
19,896

521
$7,636

1,932
$10,593

$ 322

$2,668

203
$ 1,333

2,656
$22,552

55
(802)
(747)
22
(839)
5
67
4
18

(a) Unaffiliated revenues include sales to unconsolidated equity affiliates.
(b) Intersegment sales are made at prices comparable to those received from unaffiliated customers and in some instances are affected by regulatory considerations.
(c) Reflects results through August 16, 1999. See Note 2.
(d) Includes consolidating eliminations.

61

Selected Financial and Credit Information (Unaudited)
The following review of the credit characteristics of Enron Corp. and its subsidiaries and affiliates should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated
Financial Statements. The credit information that follows represents management’s calculation of certain key credit ratios of Enron.
(In millions)
Total Obligations
Balance sheet debt (short- and long-term)

1999

1998

$ 8,152

$ 7,357

Balance Sheet

202
96
1,039
87
$ 8,781

Note 15
Note 15
Balance Sheet
Note 7
Note 9
Note 15

Total Obligations

180
715
(239)
$ 8,808

Shareholders’ Equity and Certain Other Items
Shareholders’ Equity

$ 9,570

$ 7,048

Balance sheet

Items added to shareholders’ equity:
Minority interests
Company-obligated preferred securities of subsidiaries
Total Shareholders’ Equity and Certain Other Items

2,430
1,000
$13,000

2,143
1,001
$10,192

Balance Sheet, Note 8
Balance Sheet, Note 10

Funds Flow from Operations
Net cash provided by operating activities
Add back: Changes in working capital
Funds Flow from Operations

$ 1,228
(1,000)
$ 2,228

$ 1,640
(233)
$ 1,873

Cash Flow Statement
Cash Flow Statement

$

$

Items added to liability profile:
Accounts receivable sales(a)
Guarantees(b)
Residual value guarantees of synthetic leases
Net liability from price risk management activities(c)
Debt exchangeable for EOG Resources, Inc. shares(d)
Debt of unconsolidated equity affiliates(e)
Firm transportation obligations(f)

Interest and Estimated Lease Interest Expense
Interest incurred
Capitalized interest
Interest and Related Charges, net

$

710
(54)
656

$

616
(66)
550

Estimated Lease Interest Expense(g)

$

124

$

125

Adjusted Earnings for Credit Analysis
Income before interest, minority interests and income taxes

$ 1,995

Adjustments to IBIT:
Gain on sales of assets and investments
Impairment of long-lived assets
Distributions in excess of (less than) earnings of unconsolidated equity affiliates
Estimated lease interest expense(g)
Total Adjusted Earnings for Credit Analysis
Key Credit Ratios
Funds flow interest coverage(h)
Pretax interest coverage(i)
Funds flow from operations/Total obligations
Total obligations/Total obligations plus Total
shareholders’ equity and certain other items
Debt/Total capital(j)

$

Source

Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Income Statement

1,582

Income Statement

(541)
441
173
124
$ 2,192

(82)
(10)
125
$ 1,615

Cash Flow Statement
Cash Flow Statement
Note 9

3.67
2.63
25.3%

3.53
2.18
21.3%

40.4%
38.5%

46.3%
41.9%

(a) Accounts receivable sold under agreements to provide financing to meet seasonal working capital needs.
(b) Management estimates Enron’s risk adjusted exposure on uncollateralized guarantees is approximately 10% of the total nominal value of the guarantees issued.
(c) Excess of price risk management liabilities over price risk management assets.
(d) Enron expects to extinguish this obligation by delivering shares of EOG Resources, Inc. stock.
(e) Debt of unconsolidated equity affiliates is non-recourse and therefore is excluded from Enron’s obligations.
( f ) Firm transportation obligations are excluded, as contracted capacity has market value.
(g) Management estimates Enron’s lease interest expense for the year based on the average minimum lease payment or commitment (excluding principal repayments and other items).
(h) Calculated as funds flow from operations plus interest incurred and estimated lease interest expense, divided by interest incurred and estimated lease interest expense.
( i ) Calculated as total adjusted earnings divided by interest incurred and estimated lease interest expense.
( j ) Total capital includes debt, minority interests, company-obligated preferred securities of subsidiaries and shareholders’ equity.

62

ENRON OFFICES
CORPORATE HEADQUARTERS
Enron Corp.
1400 Smith Street
Houston, TX 77002
Tel: (713) 853-6161
www.enron.com

New Delhi, India
Sandton, South Africa
Seoul, Korea
Singapore
Sydney, Australia
Tokyo, Japan

ENRON BROADBAND SERVICES
WHOLESALE ENERGY BUSINESSES
North America
Enron North America Corp.
Calgary, Canada
Charleston, West Virginia
Chicago, Illinois
Denver, Colorado
Houston, Texas
Mexico City, Mexico
Monterrey, Mexico
New York, New York
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Portland, Oregon
San Francisco, California
Toronto, Canada

Europe

Houston, Texas
Portland, Oregon

RETAIL ENERGY SERVICES
Enron Energy Services, LLC
Burlington, Massachusetts
Costa Mesa, California
Hinsdale, Illinois
Houston, Texas
Norcross, Georgia
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
San Ramon, California

TRANSPORTATION AND DISTRIBUTION

Enron Europe, Ltd.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Brussels, Belgium
Bucharest, Romania
Budapest, Hungary
Frankfurt, Germany
Helsinki, Finland
London, United Kingdom*
Madrid, Spain
Milan, Italy
Moscow, Russia
Oslo, Norway
Stockholm, Sweden
Warsaw, Poland
Zurich, Switzerland

Enron Transportation & Storage
Minneapolis, Minnesota
Omaha, Nebraska

*Corporate headquarters in Europe

Alborg, Denmark
Athens, Greece
London, United Kingdom
Madrid, Spain
Salzbergen, Germany
Stockholm, Sweden

South America, Latin America
and Caribbean Basin
Bogotá, Colombia
Buenos Aires, Argentina
Caracas, Venezuela
Kingston, Jamaica
Managua, Nicaragua
Nivel, Guatemala
Panamá City, Panamá
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
San Juan, Puerto Rico
Santa Cruz, Bolivia
Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic
São Paulo, Brazil

Portland General Electric Company
Portland, Oregon

ENRON WIND CORP.
North America
Tehachapi, California

Europe

Africa, Middle East and Asia
Anigua, Guam
Bangkok, Thailand
Beijing, China
Dubai, United Arab Emirates
Hanoi, Vietnam
Jakarta, Indonesia
Manila, Philippines
Maputo, Mozambique
Mumbai, India

63

ROBERT A. BELFER (1, 3)
New York, New York
Chairman, Belco Oil & Gas Corp.
NORMAN P. BLAKE, JR. (3, 4)
Memphis, Tennessee
CEO and Secretary General, United States
Olympic Committee, and Former Chairman,
President and CEO, Promus Hotel Corporation
RONNIE C. CHAN (2, 3)
Hong Kong
Chairman, Hang Lung Development
Company Limited
JOHN H. DUNCAN (1*, 4)
Houston, Texas
Former Chairman of the Executive Committee
of Gulf & Western Industries, Inc.
JOE H. FOY (1, 2)
Houston, Texas
Retired Senior Partner, Bracewell & Patterson,
and Former President and COO, Houston
Natural Gas Corp.

WENDY L. GRAMM (2, 5)
Washington, D.C.
Former Chairman, U.S. Commodity Futures
Trading Commission
KEN L. HARRISON
Portland, Oregon
Former Chairman and CEO, Portland General
Electric Company
ROBERT K. JAEDICKE (2*, 4)
Stanford, California
Professor of Accounting (Emeritus) and
Former Dean, Graduate School of Business,
Stanford University
KENNETH L. LAY (1)
Houston, Texas
Chairman and CEO, Enron Corp.
CHARLES A. LEMAISTRE (1, 4*)
San Antonio, Texas
President Emeritus, University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center

BOARD OF DIRECTORS

64

REBECCA MARK-JUSBASCHE
Houston, Texas
Chairman and CEO, Azurix Corp.

JEFFREY K. SKILLING (1)
Houston, Texas
President and COO, Enron Corp.

JOHN MENDELSOHN (2, 5)
Houston, Texas
President, University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center

JOHN A. URQUHART (3)
Fairfield, Connecticut
Senior Advisor to the Chairman, Enron Corp.,
President, John A. Urquhart Associates, and
Former Senior Vice President of Industrial and
Power Systems, General Electric Company

JEROME J. MEYER (3, 5)
Wilsonville, Oregon
Chairman, Tektronix, Inc.
PAULO V. FERRAZ PEREIRA(2, 3)
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
President and CEO, Meriodinal Financial Group,
and Former President and CEO,
State Bank of Rio de Janerio, Brazil
FRANK SAVAGE (3, 4)
Stamford, Connecticut
Chairman, Alliance Capital Management
International (a division of Alliance Capital
Management L.P.)

Executive Committee
Audit Committee
(3)
Finance Committee
(4)
Compensation Committee
(5)
Nominating Committee
*
Denotes Chairman
(1)
(2)

JOHN WAKEHAM (2, 5*)
London, England
Former U.K. Secretary of State for Energy and
Leader of the Houses of Lords and Commons
HERBERT S. WINOKUR, JR. (1, 3*)
Greenwich, Connecticut
Chairman and CEO, Capricorn Holdings, Inc.,
and Former Senior Executive Vice President,
Penn Central Corporation

FROM LEFT TO RIGHT: Charles A. LeMaistre,
Ronnie C. Chan, Herbert S. Winokur, Jr., Paulo V.
Ferraz Pereira, Kenneth L. Lay, Jeffrey K. Skilling,
Norman P. Blake, Jr., Wendy L. Gramm, John
Mendelsohn, Robert A. Belfer, John Wakeham,
Robert K. Jaedicke, John H. Duncan, Joe H. Foy,
Ken L. Harrison, Jerome J. Meyer, Rebecca MarkJusbasche, Frank Savage and John A. Urquhart.

65

ENRON EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
JIM BANNANTINE
Co-Chairman & Chief Executive
Officer, Enron South America

MARK FREVERT
Chairman & Chief Executive
Officer, Enron Europe, Ltd.

STEVE KEAN
Executive Vice President &
Chief of Staff, Enron Corp.

CLIFF BAXTER
Chairman & Chief Executive
Officer, Enron North America

KEVIN HANNON
Chief Operating Officer, Enron
Broadband Services

MARK KOENIG
Executive Vice President,
Investor Relations, Enron Corp.

SANJAY BHATNAGAR
Chief Executive Officer, Enron India

KEN HARRISON
Chief Executive Officer, Portland
General Electric Company

KEN LAY
Chief Executive Officer &
Chairman of the Board,
Enron Corp.

RICK BUY
Executive Vice President &
Chief Risk Officer, Enron Corp.
RICK CAUSEY
Executive Vice President & Chief
Accounting Officer, Enron Corp.
DIOMEDES CHRISTODOULOU
Co-Chairman & Chief Executive
Officer, Enron South America
JIM DERRICK
Executive Vice President & General
Counsel, Enron Corp.
ANDY FASTOW
Executive Vice President & Chief
Financial Officer, Enron Corp.
PEGGY FOWLER
President, Portland General
Electric Company

REBECCA MARK–JUSBASCHE
Chairman & Chief Executive
Officer, Azurix Corp.

JOE HIRKO
Chief Executive Officer, Enron
Broadband Services

MIKE MCCONNELL
Chief Executive Officer, Global
Technology, Enron Corp.

STAN HORTON
Chairman & Chief Executive
Officer, Enron Gas Pipeline Group

REBECCA MCDONALD
Chairman & Chief Executive
Officer, Enron Asia Pacific,
Africa & China

LARRY IZZO
President & Chief Executive Officer,
Enron Engineering & Construction
Company

JEFF MCMAHON
Executive Vice President, Finance
and Treasurer, Enron Corp.
MARK METTS
Executive Vice President,
Corporate Development,
Enron Corp.

LOU PAI
Chairman & Chief Executive Officer,
Enron Energy Services, LLC
KEN RICE
Chief Commercial Officer, Enron
Broadband Services

DAVID HAUG
Chairman & Chief Executive
Officer, Enron Caribbean, Enron
Middle East, Enron Global LNG

KURT HUNEKE
Chief Executive Officer, Global
Asset Operations, Enron Corp.

CINDY OLSON
Executive Vice President, Human
Resources & Community Relations,
Enron Corp.

JEFF SHERRICK
President & Chief Executive Officer,
Enron Global Exploration &
Production
JOHN SHERRIFF
President, Enron Europe, Ltd.
JEFF SKILLING
President & Chief Operating
Officer, Enron Corp.
JOE SUTTON
Vice Chairman, Enron Corp.
GREG WHALLEY
President & Chief Operating
Officer, Enron North America
TOM WHITE
Vice Chairman, Enron Energy
Services, LLC

SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
TRANSFER AGENT, REGISTRAR, DIVIDEND
PAYING AND REINVESTMENT PLAN AGENT
(DIRECTSERVICE PROGRAM)
First Chicago Trust Company, a division of
EquiServe
P.O. Box 2500
Jersey City, NJ 07303-2500
(800) 519-3111
(201) 324-1225
TDD: (201) 222-4955
For direct deposit of dividends only, call:
(800) 870-2340
Internet address: http://www.equiserve.com
1999 ANNUAL REPORT
This Annual Report and the statements contained herein are submitted for the general
information of the shareholders of Enron Corp.
and are not intended for use in connection
with or to induce the sale or purchase of
securities.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Enron Corp.’s Annual Report to shareholders
and Form 10-K report to the Securities and
Exchange Commission are available upon request
on Enron’s Internet address
http://www.enron.com
For information regarding specific shareholder
questions, write or call the Transfer Agent.

66

Financial analysts and investors who need
additional information should contact:
Enron Corp.
Investor Relations Dept.
P.O. Box 1188, Suite 4926B
Houston, TX 77251-1188
(713) 853-3956
Enron’s Internet address: http://www.enron.com

ANNUAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS
The Annual Meeting of Shareholders will be
held in Houston, Texas, in the LaSalle Ballroom
of the Doubletree Hotel at Allen Center, 400
Dallas Street, on Tuesday, May 2, 2000, at 10
a.m. Information with respect to this meeting is
contained in the Proxy Statement sent with this
Annual Report to holders of record of Enron
Corp.’s Common Stock and the Cumulative
Second Preferred Convertible Stock on March 3,
2000. The 1999 Annual Report is not to be considered a part of the proxy soliciting material.

DIVIDEND REINVESTMENT
The Transfer Agent offers holders of Enron Corp.
Common Stock the opportunity to reinvest part
or all of their dividends in the purchase of additional shares of Common Stock by participating
in the DirectSERVICE Program for Shareholders
of Enron Corp. This program gives almost everyone the opportunity to purchase additional
shares of Common Stock without paying a brokerage commission. Anyone wishing to participate in the program may, upon timely application, reinvest some, all, or none of the cash dividends paid on their Common Stock, or make
optional cash payments of as little as $25, after
an initial investment of $250 for new shareholders, with a limit of $120,000 per calendar year.
Direct requests for further information to:
DirectSERVICE Program for Shareholders of
Enron Corp.
c/o First Chicago Trust Company, a division of
EquiServe
P.O. Box 2598
Jersey City, NJ 07303-2598
Shareholders may call: (800) 519-3111
Non-shareholders requests for program materials:
(800) 662-7662
Internet address: http://www.equiserve.com
TDD: (201) 222-4955

ENRON operates networks
throughout the world to
develop and enhance energy
and broadband communication
services. Networks, unlike
vertically integrated business
structures, facilitate the flow of
information and expertise. We
can spot market signals faster
and respond more quickly.
Networks empower individuals,
freeing them to craft innovative
and substantive solutions to
customer problems. Networks
are the foundation of our
knowledge-based businesses,
and they provide exceptional
returns and value for our
shareholders.

OUR VALUES
COMMUNICATION

INTEGRITY

We have an obligation to communicate. Here, we

We work with customers and prospects openly,

take the time to talk with one another… and to

honestly and sincerely. When we say we will do

listen. We believe that information is meant to

something, we will do it; when we say we cannot

move and that information moves people.

or will not do something, then we won’t do it.

6 WHOLESALE ENERGY BUSINESS

RESPECT

EXCELLENCE

14 ENRON BROADBAND SERVICES

We treat others as we would like to be treated

We are satisfied with nothing less than the very best

ourselves. We do not tolerate abusive or disrespectful

in everything we do. We will continue to raise the

treatment. Ruthlessness, callousness and arrogance

bar for everyone. The great fun here will be for all

don’t belong here.

of us to discover just how good we can really be.

CONTENTS
1 FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
2 LETTER TO SHAREHOLDERS

18 RETAIL ENERGY SERVICES
22 TRANSPORTATION AND DISTRIBUTION
26 A GLOBAL LOOK AT ENRON (MAPS)
30 FINANCIAL REVIEW
63 ENRON OFFICES
64 BOARD OF DIRECTORS
66 EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
66 SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
67 OUR VALUES

On the front and back covers: Five of the 13 Chairman’s Roundtable members of
1999 and the winner of the 1999 Chairman’s Award, Bobbye Brown (far left on
front cover).The Chairman’s Award, which includes the selection of Chairman’s
Roundtable members, is an annual, employee-driven program that recognizes
Enron’s everyday heroes—people who make a difference by living our values of
communication, integrity, respect and excellence in everything they do.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 1999

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 1999

®

1400 Smith Street
Houston, Texas 77002-7361
www.enron.com

©2000 Enron Corp. Enron and the Enron logo are registered trademarks and Endless possibilities, ePowered,
ePowered Media Cast, ePowered Media Transport and EnronOnline are trademarks of Enron Corp. or one of
its subsidiaries. Other company, product and service names may be trademarks of others.

