Enron Annual Report 2000

Enron Annual Report 2000

Enron manages efficient, flexible networks to reliably deliver physical products at
predictable prices. In 2000 Enron used its networks to deliver a record
amount of physical natural gas, electricity, bandwidth capacity and
other products. With our networks, we can significantly expand our
existing businesses while extending our services to new markets
with enormous potential for growth.

CONTENTS
1 FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS

20 FINANCIAL REVIEW

2 LETTER TO SHAREHOLDERS

53 OUR VALUES

9 ENRON WHOLESALE SERVICES

54 BOARD OF DIRECTORS

14 ENRON ENERGY SERVICES

56 ENRON CORPORATE POLICY COMMITTEE

16 ENRON BROADBAND SERVICES

56 SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION

18 ENRON TRANSPORTATION SERVICES

FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

$100,789

$ 40,112

$ 31,260

$ 20,273

$ 13,289

1,266
(287)
979

957
(64)
893

698
5
703

515
(410)
105

493
91
584

$

1.47
(0.35)
1.12

1.18
(0.08)
1.10

1.00
0.01
1.01

0.87
(0.71)
0.16

0.91
0.17
1.08

Dividends paid per common share

$

0.50

0.50

0.48

0.46

0.43

Total assets

$ 65,503

33,381

29,350

22,552

16,137

Cash from operating activities
(excluding working capital)

$

3,010

2,228

1,873

276

742

Capital expenditures and equity investments

$

3,314

3,085

3,564

2,092

1,483

(Unaudited: in millions, except per share data)

Revenues
Net income:
Operating results
Items impacting comparability
Total
Earnings per diluted common share:
Operating results
Items impacting comparability
Total

NYSE price range
High
Low
Close December 31

$
$

$

$

90 9⁄16
41 3⁄8
83 1⁄8

1,266

100.8

29 3⁄8
19 1⁄16
28 17⁄32

44 7⁄8
28 3⁄4
44 3⁄8

22 9⁄16
17 1⁄2
20 25⁄32

23 3⁄4
17 5⁄16
21 9⁄16

1.47
1.18

957

40.1
31.3
20.3

98

99

00

99

00

99

Income
($ in millions)

REVENUES

OPERATING RESULTS

00

Earnings Per
Diluted Share
(in dollars)

1,415%

89%

129%

Enron

S&P
500

350%

383%

Enron

S&P
500

(9%)
S&P
500

One Year

Five Years

CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN
(through December 31, 2000)

Enron

Ten Years

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

97

($ in billions)

1

TO OUR SHAREHOLDERS
Enron’s performance in 2000 was a success by any measure, as we continued to

outdistance the
competition
and solidify our leadership in each of our major businesses. In our largest business,
wholesale services, we experienced an enormous increase of 59 percent in physical
energy deliveries. Our retail energy business achieved its highest level ever of total
contract value. Our newest business, broadband services, significantly accelerated
transaction activity, and our oldest business, the interstate pipelines, registered
increased earnings. The company’s net income reached a record $1.3 billion in 2000.

Enron has built unique and strong businesses

faster, flexible and more reliable connectivity. Enron

that have tremendous opportunities for growth.

is in a unique position to provide the products and

These businesses — wholesale services, retail energy

services needed in these environments. Our size,

services, broadband services and transportation

experience and skills give us enormous competitive

services — can be significantly expanded within

advantages. We have:

their very large existing markets and extended

• Robust networks of strategic assets that we own

to new markets with enormous growth potential.

or have contractual access to, which give us

At a minimum, we see our market opportunities

greater flexibility and speed to reliably deliver

company-wide tripling over the next five years.
Enron is laser-focused on earnings per share,
and we expect to continue strong earnings per-

that result in price and service advantages.

formance. We will leverage our extensive business

• Risk management skills that enable us to offer

networks, market knowledge and logistical exper-

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

tise to produce high-value bundled products for an

2

widespread logistical solutions.
• Unparalleled liquidity and market-making abilities

reliable prices as well as reliable delivery.
• Innovative technology such as EnronOnline to

increasing number of global customers.

deliver products and services easily at the lowest

Competitive Advantages

possible cost.

Our targeted markets are very large and are

These capabilities enable us to provide high-

undergoing fundamental changes. Energy deregu-

value products and services other wholesale service

lation and liberalization continue, and customers

providers cannot. We can take the physical compo-

are driving demand for reliable delivery of energy

nents and repackage them to suit the specific needs

at predictable prices. Many markets are experienc-

of customers. We treat term, price and delivery as

ing tighter supply, higher prices and increased

variables that are blended into a single, compre-

volatility, and there is increasing interdependence

hensive solution. Our technology and fulfillment

within regions and across commodities. Similarly,

systems ensure execution. In current market envi-

the broadband industry faces issues of overcapacity

ronments, these abilities make Enron the right

and capital constraint even as demand increases for

company with the right model at the right time.

The Astonishing Success of EnronOnline
In late 1999 we extended our successful busi-

wholesale services income before interest, minority
interests and taxes (IBIT) increased 72 percent to $2.3

ness model to a web-based system, EnronOnline.

billion. Over the past five years, as physical volumes

EnronOnline has broadened our market reach,

have increased, wholesale IBIT has grown at a com-

accelerated our business activity and enabled us

pounded average annual rate of 48 percent, and we

to scale our business beyond our own expectations.

have had 20 consecutive quarters of year-over-year

By the end of 2000, EnronOnline had executed

growth. We have established core wholesale busi-

548,000 transactions with a notional value of $336

nesses in both natural gas and power in North

billion, and it is now the world’s largest web-based

America and Europe, where we are market leaders.

eCommerce system.

In North America, we deliver almost double

With EnronOnline, we are reaching a greater

the amount of natural gas and electricity than the

number of customers more quickly and at a lower

second tier of competitors. Our network of 2,500

cost than ever. It’s a great new business generator,

delivery points provides price advantages, flexibility

attracting users who are drawn by the site’s ease of

and speed-to-market in both natural gas and power.

use, transparent, firm prices and the fact that they

Natural gas, our most developed business, has seen

are transacting directly with Enron. In 2000 our

substantial volume growth throughout the United

total physical volumes increased significantly as a

States and Canada. In 2000 our physical natural gas

direct result of EnronOnline.

volumes were up 77 percent to 24.7 billion cubic feet
per day (Bcf/d). Physical power volumes were up 52

left page:
Jeffrey K. Skilling
President and CEO
right page:
Kenneth L. Lay
Chairman

percent to 579 million megawatt-hours (MWh).
We are building a similar, large network in
Europe. In 2000 we marketed 3.6 Bcf/d of natural gas
and 53 million MWh in this market, a vast increase
over 1999. As markets open, we tenaciously pursue
the difficult, early deals that break ground for
subsequent business. We are the only pan-European

EnronOnline has expanded to include more than

player, and we are optimizing our advantage to
conduct cross-border transactions.
We are extending Enron’s proven business

1,200 of our products. It also has streamlined our

approach to other markets, and integrating

back-office processes, making our entire operation

EnronOnline into all our businesses as an accelera-

more efficient. It has reduced our overall transaction

tor. Our growth rates are rising in areas such as

costs by 75 percent and increased the productivity

metals, forest products, weather derivatives and coal.

of our commercial team by five-fold on average.

We expect these businesses to contribute to earnings

We are not sitting still with this important new

even more significantly in 2001.

business tool — in September 2000 we released

Enron Energy Services

EnronOnline 2.0, which added even more customer

Our retail unit is a tremendous business that

functionality and customization features and

experienced a break-out year in 2000. We signed

attracted more customers.

contracts with a total value of $16.1 billion of cus-

Enron Wholesale Services

tomers’ future energy expenditures, almost double

The wholesale services business delivered

the $8.5 billion signed in 1999. We recorded increas-

record physical volumes of 51.7 trillion British

ing positive earnings in all four quarters in 2000, and

thermal units equivalent per day (TBtue/d) in 2000,

the business generated $103 million of recurring IBIT.

compared to 32.4 TBtue/d in 1999. As a result,

Energy and facilities management outsourcing is

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

EnronOnline has enabled us to scale quickly,
soundly and economically. Since its introduction,

3

now a proven concept, and we’ve established a

businesses and offer viewers at home an additional

profitable deal flow, which includes extensions of

convenient way to choose and receive entertain-

contracts by many existing customers. Price volatility

ment. Enron provides the wholesale logistical services

in energy markets has drawn fresh attention to our

that bridge the gap between content providers and

capabilities, increasing demand for our services. No

last-mile distributors. Full-length movies-on-demand

other provider has the skill, experience, depth and

service has been successfully tested in four U.S.

versatility to offer both energy commodity and

metropolitan markets.

price risk management services, as well as energy

Enron Transportation Services

asset management and capital solutions. In 2001

The new name for our gas pipeline group accu-

we expect to close approximately $30 billion in

rately reflects a cultural shift to add more innovative

new total contract value, including business from

customer services to our efficient pipeline operation.

our newest market, Europe.

To serve our customers more effectively, we are

Enron Broadband Services

increasingly incorporating the web into those rela-

We have created a new market for bandwidth

tionships. Customers can go online to schedule nomi-

intermediation with Enron Broadband Services. In

nations and handle inquiries, and they can transact

2000 we completed 321 transactions with 45 coun-

for available capacity on EnronOnline. The pipelines

16.1

51.7

32.4
27.3

8.5

3.8

Other
Electricity
Natural Gas
98

99

00

98

WHOLESALE SERVICES – PHYSICAL VOLUMES
(trillion British thermal units equivalent per day)

continued to provide strong earnings and cash flow

mediation capabilities to include a broad range of

in 2000. Demand for natural gas is at a high in the

network services, such as dark fiber, circuits, Internet

United States, and we’re adding capacity to take

Protocol service and data storage. Our opportunities

advantage of expansion opportunities in all markets.

are increasing commensurately.

New capacity is supported by long-term contracts.

field is network connectivity — providing the

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

00

terparties. We are expanding our broadband inter-

Part of the value we bring to the broadband

4

99

ENRON ENERGY SERVICES –
VALUE OF CONTRACTS ORIGINATED
($ in billions)

Strong Returns
Enron is increasing earnings per share and

switches, the network intelligence and the inter-

continuing our strong returns to shareholders.

mediation skills to enable the efficient exchange

Recurring earnings per share have increased

of capacity between independent networks. We

steadily since 1997 and were up 25 percent in

operate 25 pooling points to connect independent

2000. The company’s total return to shareholders

third-parties — 18 in the United States, six in

was 89 percent in 2000, compared with a negative

Europe and one in Japan. At least 10 more are

9 percent returned by the S&P 500. The 10-year

scheduled to be completed in 2001.

return to Enron shareholders was 1,415 percent

Enron also has developed a compelling

compared with 383 percent for the S&P 500.

commerical model to deliver premium content-on-

Enron hardly resembles the company we were

demand services via the Enron Intelligent Network.

in the early days. During our 15-year history, we have

Content providers want to extend their established

stretched ourselves beyond our own expectations.

We have metamorphosed from an asset-based

EnronOnline will accelerate their growth. We plan

pipeline and power generating company to a

to leverage all of these competitive advantages to

marketing and logistics company whose biggest

create significant value for our shareholders.

assets are its well-established business approach
and its innovative people.
Our performance and capabilities cannot be
compared to a traditional energy peer group. Our
results put us in the top tier of the world’s corpora-

Kenneth L. Lay

tions. We have a proven business concept that is

Chairman

eminently scalable in our existing businesses and
adaptable enough to extend to new markets.
As energy markets continue their transformation, and non-energy markets develop, we are
poised to capture a good share of the enormous

Jeffrey K. Skilling

opportunities they represent. We believe wholesale

President and

gas and power in North America, Europe and Japan

Chief Executive Officer

380

391

236

351

59
23
3
98

99

00

ENRON TRANSPORTATION SERVICES
REPORTED INCOME BEFORE INTEREST AND TAXES
($ in millions)

1Q

2Q

3Q

4Q

ENRON BROADBAND SERVICES –
2000 BANDWIDTH TRANSACTIONS

will grow from a $660 billion market today to a
$1.7 trillion market over the next several years.
Retail energy services in the United States and
Europe have the potential to grow from $180 billion
today to $765 billion in the not-so-distant future.
Broadband’s prospective global growth is huge —
it should increase from just $17 billion today to
$1.4 trillion within five years.
Taken together, these markets present a $3.9
trillion opportunity for Enron, and we have just
scratched the surface. Add to that the other big
steel, coal and air-emissions credits — and the
opportunity rises by $830 billion to reach nearly
$4.7 trillion.
Our talented people, global presence, financial strength and massive market knowledge have
created our sustainable and unique businesses.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

markets we are pursuing — forest products, metals,

5

In Volatile
Markets,
EVERYTHING CHANGES BUT US

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

When customers do business with
Enron, they get our commitment to reliably deliver their product at a predictable
price, regardless of the market condition.
This commitment is possible because
of Enron’s unrivaled access to markets
and liquidity. We manage flexible networks with thousands of delivery points,
giving us multiple options and a distinct
service advantage.
Our extensive daily market activity
keeps us on top of price movements, so
we can manage our customers’ price risk.
We offer a multitude of predictable pricing options.
Market access and information allow
Enron to deliver comprehensive logistical
solutions that work in volatile markets
or markets undergoing fundamental
changes, such as energy and broadband.
This core logistical capability led to
our best year ever in 2000 because physical volumes drive our wholesale profits.
We see ample opportunities for further
volume growth in existing and new markets. Enron’s ability to deliver is the one
constant in an increasingly complex and
competitive world.

6

Enron blends these four elements together
to deliver premium logistical solutions.

>>

Knowledgeable Pricing
• Enron’s market activity captures massive
amounts of pricing information.
• Pricing information helps Enron effectively
manage its customers’ price risk and its
own.
• Enron allows customers to choose the
optimal way to set a predictable price.

Technology Advantages
• Information systems quickly distribute
real-time information.
• EnronOnline extends Enron’s reach to
increase volumes and market share.
• Enron’s sophisticated systems track
prices, register exposures and monitor
customer credit.

Scalable Fulfillment
• EnronOnline integrates seamlessly into
delivery fulfillment systems, reducing
transaction costs.
• Existing systems scale readily as
volumes increase.
• Standardized legal and tax compliance
speed business.
• Systematic risk assessment and control
protect Enron.

ENRON ANNUAL
MAKES MARKETS
REPORT 2000

Extensive Market Networks
• Enron manages large, flexible networks
of assets, contracts and services that
provide unrivaled liquidity.
• Liquidity allows Enron to move products
in and out of markets so it can maximize
opportunity and margins.
• Because it has broad physical access,
Enron reliably executes contracts.

7

created liquidity on a scale never seen before. It is a
dynamic business accelerator: It took nearly a

Wholesale services is Enron’s largest and fastest

decade for Enron’s daily gas transactions to reach

growing business, with sustainable growth oppor-

13.9 Bcf in 1999. Just 12 months later, EnronOnline

tunities in each of its markets. In 2000 income before

had helped to practically double daily transactions

interest, minority interests and taxes (IBIT) rose 72

to 24.7 Bcf.

percent to $2.3 billion, with record physical energy

EnronOnline magnifies the success of our

volumes of 51.7 trillion British thermal units equiv-

existing business, which springs from the scale and

alent per day (TBtue/d) — a 59 percent increase

scope of our established networks. We touch more

over 1999.

parts of North America’s energy system than any

For the past five years, wholesale services

other merchant, with access to upwards of 2,500

earnings have grown at an average compounded

distinct delivery points each day. The widespread

growth rate of 48 percent annually, and our com-

delivery options and possibilities of our network

petitive position is growing stronger. Customers

give us a price and service advantage. Our networks

transact with Enron because we offer products and

and presence in nationwide energy markets also

services few others can match. With our flexible

enable us to capture and distribute massive amounts

networks and unique capabilities in risk manage-

of information about real-time market supply and

ment and finance, we deliver the widest range of

demand, grid constraints and bottlenecks. When

reliable logistical solutions at predictable prices.

the market moves, we are able to conduct business

Enron delivers more than two times the natural
gas and power volumes as does its nearest energy

while competitors are still fact-finding.
Our people also make a difference. We are

marketing competitor. Our formidable lead comes

able to attract the best and the brightest and place

from our willingness to enter markets early and

them in an entrepreneurial atmosphere in which

serve as a market-maker to build liquidity and price

they can thrive. With our intellectual capital, we

transparency. Breakthrough technology applications,

develop premium high-margin structured products

such as EnronOnline, accelerate our market penetra-

that draw on our liquidity and market knowledge.

tion. These competitive advantages have made us

A good example is the gas-marketing-services hub

the most successful energy marketer in the two

in Chicago we launched with People’s Energy in

largest deregulating energy markets, North America

March 2000. Known as Enovate, this venture opti-

and Europe. We expect to achieve a similar leader-

mizes People’s 30 Bcf a year of Chicago-area storage

ship position as we extend our business approach

capacity and related transportation. It played a role

to new regions, products and industries.

in increasing our gas volumes in the central United

Our business has flourished with EnronOnline.
Launched in November 1999, EnronOnline handled
548,000 transactions in 2000 with a gross notional

States by 156 percent, the largest increase in our
2000 North American physical volumes.
We continually assess the necessity of adding

value of $336 billion. EnronOnline is unquestionably

or owning assets in a region. Sometimes it is less

the largest web-based eCommerce site in the world

expensive to own an asset than to replicate the

and dwarfs all other energy marketing web sites

asset in the market through contracting and mar-

combined. By the fourth quarter of 2000, it account-

ket-making. We are developing generation plants

ed for almost half of Enron’s transactions over all

to sell merchant power to high-demand markets,

business units. EnronOnline has pushed productivity

including proposed facilities in California, Florida,

through the roof: Transactions per commercial person

Texas, Louisiana and Georgia. But as liquidity

rose to 3,084 in 2000 from 672 in 1999. EnronOnline

increases, asset ownership may no longer be neces-

Version 2.0, launched in September 2000, has attract-

sary. We plan to sell Houston Pipe Line Company,

ed more users with its additional functionality (see

and Louisiana Resources Company is now held by

“EnronOnline” next page).

Bridgeline Holdings, L.P., a joint venture in which

Enron North America

Enron retains an interest. Additionally, in the second

In North America, Enron’s physical natural gas

quarter of 2001 we expect to close the sale of five

volumes increased 77 percent to 24.7 billion cubic

of the six electricity peaking generation units in

feet per day (Bcf/d) in 2000 from 13.9 Bcf/d in 1999.

operation. The result is the same earnings power

Power deliveries increased 52 percent to 579 million

with less invested capital.

megawatt-hours (MWh) from 381 million MWh the
year before.
EnronOnline has been a runaway success in

Mexico’s move toward liberalizing its energy
markets should gain intensity and speed with its
new government. Increased cross-border electricity

North America. It accounted for 74 percent of

transactions between Mexico and the United States

North American volume transacted in 2000, and

seem inevitable. Our activities in Mexico seek to

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

ENRON WHOLESALE SERVICES

9

optimize both the Mexican electricity market and

mediaries such as Enron to hedge their fuel and

cross-border activity between the two countries.

power prices.

Enron also is active in South America, where

On the Continent, our power volumes

we own and develop assets to help create an

increased to 50 million MWh in 2000 from 7 million

energy network.

MWh in 1999. We are transacting at all major

Enron Europe

country interconnections, benefiting from cross-

We are rapidly extending Enron’s market-

border opportunities. We closed our first-ever

making approach into the deregulating European

transaction in France and are an active player in

markets, focusing on the U.K., the Continent and

Germany and Switzerland. We are beginning to

the Nordic region. The Continent is still in the early

partner with utilities to offer comprehensive port-

stages of liberalization. Although the European

folio management services, such as our agreement

Union has mandated liberalization of the power and

to purchase and distribute power jointly with Swiss

natural gas markets, each country is responding at

Citypower AG, which controls 19 percent of the

its own pace. The velocity of transactions is rising on

Swiss electricity market.

the Continent, however, and Enron expects to raise
the level of liquidity to make the markets work.
Our business throughout Europe is growing
rapidly. Natural gas and power volumes more than
doubled to 10.3 trillion British thermal units equiv-

EnronOnline

alent per day (TBtue/d) in 2000 from 4.1 TBtue/d in
1999. We enjoy several competitive advantages in

EnronOnline successfully leverages Enron’s core

Europe: We are the only pan-European player; we

market-making capabilities, benefiting both our

have a proven business strategy; we entered the

customers and Enron. The web-based system

market early to build a presence; and we have

makes it easier to do business with Enron. It

attracted a talented and skilled local workforce.

also accelerates the growth of Enron’s existing

Our cross-border capabilities are becoming

businesses and facilitates quick and efficient

increasingly important as markets interconnect.

entry into new markets.

U.K. gas can now be transported to Belgium, and
subsequently to the rest of the Continent, giving us
the opportunity to develop innovative transactions
on both sides of the border. The resulting increase
in price volatility has nearly doubled U.K. gas prices,
which, along with more volatile electricity prices
ahead, has significantly improved demand for the
U.K. risk management products we offer, both now
and over the long term.
Just as in North America, EnronOnline is
increasing Enron’s reach and volumes in Europe
and is a prime driver of liquidity. Its simple con-

In Spain, electricity demand is growing faster

tracts, multi-currency capabilities, transparent and

than anywhere else in Europe, and there are limit-

competitive prices and easy accessibility have won

ed import and export capabilities. Enron is respond-

EnronOnline rapid acceptance.

ing to this opportunity by developing a 1,200-

In the U.K., power and gas volumes more than

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

doubled, with power rising to 113 million MWh in

10

megawatt plant in Arcos, south of Seville, that
should close financing in 2001.

2000, and gas volumes climbing 119 percent to reach

Continental gas liquidity is just starting to

3.2 Bcf/d. Several market factors are likely to create

increase. Our volumes grew to 472 million cubic

more business for us. The U.K.’s New Electricity

feet per day (MMcf/d) in 2000 from 53 MMcf/d in

Trading Agreements, which replace the existing

1999. While the market is in its early stages, Enron

U.K. power pool, are scheduled to be implemented

has managed to increase weekly transactions from

by the second quarter of 2001. The agreements

about 5 to 100 over the course of a year. In

will result in increased price volatility, and Enron

October we initiated the first gas supply deal in

is well-positioned to help customers manage this

Germany to the local utilities of Heidelberg,

risk. Additionally, lower power prices are shrinking

Tuebingen and Bensheim. We also are delivering

profit margins for U.K. merchant power plants,

natural gas to some large users in the Netherlands

which increasingly need to turn to market inter-

and France.

We continue to set records in the Nordic

opportunities to support our market-making activi-

region, where we are the largest power marketer.

ties, including inside-the-fence power generation.

Electricity volumes increased nearly 150 percent

Under consideration are a number of sites, which

to reach 77 million MWh in 2000 from 31 million

may be fueled by gas, liquefied natural gas or coal.

MWh in 1999. Enron’s Oslo office also is now

Enron Australia

the base of our European weather risk manage-

Enron’s market-making ability has been successfully extended to Australia, where Enron is a

As more Nordic companies outsource energy

leading provider of logistical solutions in the coun-

supply and management, Enron’s products and serv-

try’s power market. During 2000 we introduced

ices — including advanced technology applications

weather risk management products in the region,

— are eagerly sought. In December Enron entered

offering temperature-based products for Sydney,

into a two-year portfolio management agreement

Melbourne, Hong Kong, Tokyo and Osaka. The

with UPM-Kymmene Corp., one of the world’s

Sydney office also provides a strategic platform for

largest forest products companies. Enron will assist

the extension of Enron’s coal, metals and broad-

MAKING MARKETS
Enron’s networks of assets and
contractual relationships allow us
to make markets and offer realtime pricing for more than 1,200
products on EnronOnline. This
tremendous market liquidity
attracts customers and further
increases Enron’s volumes and
market share.

CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS
EnronOnline provides customers
with a more convenient way to discover prices and do business with
Enron, which increases transaction
volumes and attracts new customers. The system automatically
taps into Enron’s sophisticated customer-credit profiles to protect
Enron from credit risk.

INFORMATION SYSTEMS
EnronOnline is fully integrated
with Enron’s proprietary information systems, which provide critical
market information, process thousands of deals and help assess and
manage market and other risks. As
a result, Enron manages risks
instantaneously even in the most
volatile markets.

SCALABILITY
Enron’s well-tuned back-office system, integrated with EnronOnline,
has proven its ability to scale as
Enron’s total transactions have
grown from an average of 650 a
day at EnronOnline’s November
1999 launch to an average of
7,900 a day by year-end 2000.
As EnronOnline expands products
and volumes, Enron’s scalable
back-office will continue to be
a competitive advantage.

UPM-Kymmene in optimizing its Nordic power port-

band businesses, as well as providing support for

folio of approximately 14 terawatt hours.

Enron’s operations in the Asia-Pacific region.

Enron Japan

Extending to New Markets

Enron Japan formally opened its Tokyo office

Enron’s durable business approach, which has

in October 2000. Japan represents an enormous

driven our success in the natural gas and electricity

opportunity: Its electricity rates are the highest in

markets, is eminently applicable to other markets

the world, and electricity consumption is second

and geographical regions. While we are remaining

only to the United States. We have attracted top

focused on increasing earnings and opportunities

talent to develop wholesale and joint venture possi-

in gas and power, we also are extending Enron’s

bilities, and have introduced our first product for

method to large, fragmented industries and prod-

large electricity users — three- to five-year contracts

ucts, where intermediation can make markets

that will reduce electricity bills immediately by up

more efficient and responsive to customer needs.

to 10 percent the first year, with the possibility of

We expect these new businesses to contribute to

further reductions in subsequent years. Our first

earnings in 2001.

contracts were signed in early 2001.
Through joint ventures with several Japanese
companies, Enron is exploring merchant plant

Enron Metals was launched in July 2000 when
Enron acquired the world’s leading merchant of nonferrous metals, MG plc. Together, MG and Enron are

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

ment business.

11

a powerful team. Enron’s financial resources and

Coal intermediation moved to a new level in

eCommerce abilities add a new dimension to MG’s

2000. The industry has been radically affected by the

widespread physical merchant skills and excellent

worldwide deregulation of the electricity industry.

customer relationships. The early results are right on

Like natural-gas-fueled generation, coal-burning

target, with physical volumes up 31 percent in 2000.

generators require flexible terms and risk-manage-

Enron Metals opens an additional door to

ment protection. Enron is able to provide unrivaled

large energy customers. Cominco Ltd., a zinc pro-

logistical support. Our coal business has led us to

ducer and an Enron Metals customer in Vancouver,

participate in sea and land logistics as well.

British Columbia, worked with Enron to halt zinc

Weather has never been better for us. Our

production for six weeks and sell its power into the

weather risk management business is up about

Northwestern power market, where it was needed.

five-fold to 1,629 transactions in 2000 from 321

Enron North America protected Cominco by struc-

transactions the year before. As in all of our mar-

turing a fixed-price swap to guarantee the sale

kets, we bring cross-commodity capabilities to our

price of the power, and Enron Metals arranged to

weather products. For instance, we closed a three-

One Coal Contract
Covers All Logistics
The process of sourcing and delivering
coal to an electricity generator is a complicated process. Enron provides a single,
comprehensive solution to manage all
logistics and risk, whether the coal is
sourced domestically or abroad. In some
cases, we have reduced the customer’s
cost of coal by as much as 10 percent.

COAL PRICE AND
SUPPLY RISKS
Enron allows generators
to purchase coal at flexible
terms, such as long-term
fixed rates or a maximum
price. Supply and price are
assured because Enron has
access to multiple sources
all over the globe. Enron is
on its way to becoming the
world’s largest wholesale
coal merchant.

year precipitation transaction that provides finan-

Cominco’s obligations. Cominco’s profit from the

cial compensation linked to natural gas prices if

deal exceeded the annual profit it makes from

precipitation falls below a pre-determined mini-

producing zinc.

mum. The weather unit worked with several other
Enron groups to transfer Enron’s risk, ultimately

ket potential. Enron has leveraged its internal risk

transacting with 10 external companies in three

management processes and systems to create a real-

markets (natural gas, weather products and insur-

time, market-based online credit evaluation system.

ance). The bundled end-product resulted in an

The idea is simple: Existing credit ratings and scoring

effective hedge for the customer.

mechanisms are not market-based and cannot
ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

CURRENCY RISKS
Like oil, imported coal is
denominated in U.S. dollars.
A British generator, however,
collects electricity payments
in pounds sterling. When
appropriate, Enron includes
currency hedges in its contracts to protect customers if
the value of the pound drops
against the dollar.

supply a portion of the zinc required to fulfill

Enron Credit is a new business with strong mar-

12

TRANSPORTATION RISKS
Imported coal travels by sea
and land, and the consumer
usually makes each arrangement separately and bears
the risk if prices or capacity
change. Enron delivers a complete logistical solution for its
customers, managing both
the process and risk as part
of just a single contract for
the coal. Enron also provides
complete domestic logistics.

Crude oil. We now average crude deliveries of

respond in real time to credit events. This means

7.5 TBtue/d to 240 customers in 46 countries. We

creditors must figure out their credit risk exposure

have introduced the first-ever 24x7 commodity

on their own. Enron Credit posts the cost of credit

market of a West Texas Intermediate crude product

as a simple interest rate for more than 10,000 com-

on EnronOnline, allowing our customers to respond

panies on its web site, www.enroncredit.com. Enron

to market-changing events at any time, day or

Credit also gives corporations the ability to hedge

night. We also concluded our biggest physical jet

their credit risk via a bankruptcy product.

fuel contract, providing 100,000 barrels for one

year at the flexible and market-based prices that

costs competitive with fossil fuel-generation for

the customer needed.

the first time. This cost competitiveness, together

LNG. Enron is establishing a liquefied natural

with government policies supporting renewable

gas (LNG) network to create merchant LNG opportu-

energy in most key markets and growing consumer

nities and to bring more gas to areas of the world

demand for green energy, have fueled 30 percent

that need it. Our LNG-related assets in operation

annual growth over the past five years.

and development in the Caribbean and the Middle

With focused efforts in the world’s three key

East form part of this network. We source surplus

wind power markets — Germany, Spain and the

LNG from the Middle East and Asia and currently

United States — Enron Wind completed 2000 with

market it in the United States.

revenues of approximately $460 million. Strong

Forest Products. Enron has offered pulp, paper

growth in both the United States and Europe will

and lumber financial products for several years, and

account for a projected sales increase of approxi-

now we are marketing physical volumes. In 2000 we

mately 100 percent in 2001.

acquired Garden State Paper Co., which gives us
access to 210,000 tons of newsprint a year and
four recycling centers in key markets. In January
2001 we agreed to purchase a newsprint mill and
related assets in Canada. With this acquisition,
Enron will become the seventh-largest producer of
newsprint in North America, giving us the physical
liquidity necessary to quickly grow this business.
Enron’s Clickpaper.com™ is powered by the
EnronOnline platform but is totally customized for
the forest products industry. It offers more than 100
financial and physical products and features news
and information tailored specifically to forest products industry customers.
Steel. In some markets, such as steel, we believe
we can run our network with minimal assets. The
industry currently suffers from overcapacity, but
lacks a market mechanism to efficiently market the
surplus. We will offer a core commodity baseline
product that can be indexed against almost all
other products in this $330 billion industry. The
outlook is promising — we have transacted our
first steel swap. This year we will build liquidity,
improve pricing efficiency and gain contractual
access to the physical product to provide comprehensive logistical support.
Enron Global Assets
Enron Global Assets manages and optimizes
Enron’s assets outside North America and Europe.
Enron has a solid portfolio of asset-based businesses. However, with the higher returns available
in the company’s other businesses, we expect to
divest some interests in a number of these assets.
The remaining asset businesses will continue to
focus on performance and complementing our marEnron Wind Corp.
The economics of wind power are more
promising than ever, creating significant growth
for Enron Wind. Technological advancements and
lower costs associated with today’s larger, more
efficient wind turbines have made wind power

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

ket-making and services businesses.

13

ENRON ENERGY SERVICES
Enron Energy Services is the retail arm of Enron,
serving business users of energy in commercial and

versatility to provide a comprehensive solution to
address uncertain, rapidly changing markets.
Customer Relationships
The core of Enron’s retail business is developing

industrial sectors. Our comprehensive energy out-

long-term, multi-year relationships with our cus-

sourcing product has proven an exceptionally

tomers. The value at contract signing is only a part

effective way for companies to reduce their costs,

of the potential value that can be realized when

manage risks of energy price volatility, improve

satisfied customers seek to add additional Enron

their energy infrastructure and focus resources

services to their contracts.

on their core businesses.
Enron Energy Services recorded its first prof-

Of the $16.1 billion in total contract value
signed in 2000, approximately $3 billion came from

itable quarter as expected at the end of 1999, and

expansions of existing contract relationships. For

continued to grow rapidly through 2000, with

example, in 1998, we signed a five-year, $250 million

increasing profits in all four quarters of 2000 and

contract with World Color Press, which later merged

aggregate recurring income before interest and

with Quebecor Printing. In 2000, based on Quebecor

taxes (IBIT) of $103 million for the year. The value of
our contracts in 2000 totaled more than $16 billion,
increasing Enron Energy Services’ cumulative contract value to more than $30 billion since late 1997.
This success reflects growing acceptance of
Enron’s energy outsourcing product — acceptance

Measuring Performance

that has meant an increasing rate of new contract-

Companies can’t improve what they can’t measure.

ing. Our retail energy success in 2000 also reflects

That’s why Enron has developed a state-of-the-art

our strong emphasis on contract execution and

Performance Measurement Center (PMC) that moni-

implementation and on excellence in customer

tors, predicts and changes customer energy consump-

service. Additionally, 2000 was marked by increased

tion. Powered by a flexible Internet-based link that

activity in Europe — an untapped market for

connects customers’ building controls to the PMC,

energy outsourcing.

and operated by a team of energy management pro-

We are positioned to dramatically increase our
profitability in 2001. Retail energy earnings will be

fessionals, the PMC is a unique resource, enabling
genuinely proactive energy management.

fueled by the rapid growth of our U.S. and European
businesses and the strong execution and extension
of existing contracts.
Market Volatility
The U.S. energy sector experienced unprecedented challenge and opportunity in 2000. In
national terms, steady movement toward a functioning deregulated energy marketplace continues.
More than half the country’s population is scheduled
to be able to choose their electricity supplier by

World’s satisfaction, the relationship was extended

2004. The ongoing energy crisis in California has

and expanded to a 10-year, $1 billion agreement

focused everyone’s attention on the complexities

including not only commodity supply, but also over-

of incomplete deregulation, the risks of unreliable

all energy management, including the design and

supply and the costs of unmanaged energy demand.

implementation of improvements in energy asset

Enron provides commercial and industrial energy

infrastructure in more than 60 facilities operated

customers with the solutions they need, bringing

by Quebecor World.

reliability and price-risk management to a market
otherwise fraught with uncertainty.
ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

The volatility of energy prices across the coun-

14

We value our long-term customer relationships, and the health of these relationships can’t
be left to luck, instinct or vague impressions. Our

try has heightened the value of energy management

Customer Satisfaction Program continually cap-

and increased the demand for retail services. With

tures our performance against expectations and

our series of capabilities — energy commodity and

benchmarks those results. Further, it is designed

price risk management capabilities, energy asset

to ensure identification and resolution — including

management and capital solutions — we remain

prompt escalation to the executive level if needed

the only firm with the skill, experience, depth and

— of any issue that might arise.

Medium-size Business Market
In the first three years of U.S. operation, Enron
Energy Services has been squarely focused on Fortune
1000 customers. But U.K.-based Enron Direct has
successfully penetrated the immense medium-size
business market, proving that we can sell energy to
smaller enterprises in a truly open retail market.
Since gaining regulatory approval in February
1999 through the end of 2000, Enron Direct has
acquired more than 130,000 gas and power customers, and continues to grow at a substantial rate.
The profitability of these smaller accounts comes
from Enron’s long-term price risk management capability and Enron Direct’s low-cost sales channels. Our
high expectations for medium-size businesses are

SENSIBLE INVESTMENTS
PMC data identify opportunities
to improve efficiency through
equipment upgrades or through
changes in processes, without
adversely affecting a client’s operations. The PMC’s sophisticated
modeling systems calculate a
cost-benefit analysis for every
potential investment in energy
assets. This analysis includes a
real-time correlation with the
price of commodities — to help
companies not only make decisions but also to show them that
there are decisions to be made.

REDUCING PEAK DEMAND
The cost of energy varies widely
over the course of the day. The
PMC uses real-time pricing information, and the stream of data
coming from the customer site, to
automatically and remotely reduce
customers’ low-priority energy use
when the price of energy is highest
—ensuring that the customer gets
maximum benefit for every dollar
spent on energy.

DIAGNOSTIC MEASUREMENTS
Most energy users don’t realize
something is wrong until the energy bill comes, and then it is much
too late. But with the Enron PMC,
real-time monitoring means that
unusual changes in energy demand
are tracked instantaneously,
enabling Enron and the customer
to identify and address problems
before energy costs get out of
hand.

MINIMIZING DOWNTIME
When repairs are needed, PMC
personnel can help control the
costs of vendor calls and on-site
repairs through diagnostic data,
and through best-practice management of a network of thousands of
service providers. We work with
service providers to categorize and
analyze the actual cost of repairs.
With Enron’s expertise and scale,
we can improve response times,
reduce downtime and cut the cost
of repairs and maintenance.

reflected by the rapid expansion of the European
operation. Enron Directo already is active in Madrid,
Spain, and similar businesses will be launched in
other countries as well.
It is our strong belief that Enron is uniquely
positioned to benefit both in the United States and
Europe from the world’s steady shift toward deregulated energy markets. We will continue to provide
sensible market solutions for the effective managedynamic global retail business to drive company
profits and sustain our reputation for innovation.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

ment of energy costs, and will continue to build a

15

ENRON BROADBAND SERVICES
Enron Broadband Services made excellent
progress executing its business plan in 2000. The

bandwidth: dark fiber, circuits, Internet Protocol (IP)
services (transporting data packets according to IP
standards) and storage capacity.
To date we have transacted with 45 counter-

build-out of Enron’s 18,000-mile global fiber

parties, including U.S. and international telecom-

network is near completion, bandwidth interme-

munications carriers, marketers and resellers and

diation transaction volume is growing exponen-

network service providers. In 2001 we expect to

tially, and we are testing the first commercially

deliver 570,000 terabytes as we grow both the

sound premium content-on-demand service.

breadth and the depth of our network and prod-

Clearly, the Enron business model is working in

ucts. We offer 32 bandwidth-related products on

the broadband market.

EnronOnline.

Enron Broadband Services’ goals are to:

Enron’s ability to provide bandwidth-on-

• Deploy the most open, efficient global broadband

demand at specified service levels and guaranteed

network, the Enron Intelligent Network.
• Be the world’s largest marketer of bandwidth and

delivery enables customers to access capacity without necessarily building, buying or expanding their

network services.
• Be the world’s largest provider of premium content delivery services.
The Enron Intelligent Network
We expect to be the first to provide broad-

The Value of Bandwidth
Intermediation

band connectivity on a global basis through the
Enron Intelligent Network (EIN). The EIN operates

Enron’s bandwidth intermediation business gives the

as a “network of networks,” providing switching

broadband industry new tools — standard contracts,

capacity between independent networks for low-

liquidity, price transparency, connectivity, quick provi-

cost scalability. We will continue to add pooling

sioning and flexibility — to help industry participants

points, which physically interconnect third parties’

optimize assets and opportunities.

networks and serve as reference points for bandwidth contracts. We currently operate 25 pooling
points: 18 in the United States, and one each
in Tokyo, London, Brussels, Amsterdam, Paris,
Dusseldorf and Frankfurt. We expect to add at
least 10 more in 2001.
EIN’s embedded intelligence, provided by
Enron’s proprietary Broadband Operating System
(BOS), gives Enron unique, powerful multi-layer
network control. The Enron BOS enables the EIN to:
• Dynamically provision bandwidth in real time.
• Control quality and access to the network for
Internet Service Providers.
• Control and monitor applications as they stream

own networks. Our bundled intermediation package

over the network to ensure quality and avoid

includes IP transport over land, under the sea, and

congested routes.

via satellite, at both fixed and peak-usage terms.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

The BOS automates the transaction process

16

For example, we are working with i2 Technologies,

all the way from the initial request for capacity to

a global provider of intelligent eBusiness solutions,

provisioning, electronic billing and funds transfer.

to connect with customers in six cities, including

With the BOS, Enron has created the first scalable,

four overseas. i2 has provisioned local-loop and

fully integrated transaction processing platform

long-haul capacity through Enron, and has low-

for delivering bandwidth capacity.

cost access to our network’s equipment as if it

Bandwidth Intermediation

were its own, but it now has the flexibility to

We exceeded our expectations by delivering
more than 72,000 terabytes of network services
in 2000, demonstrating rapidly growing industry

quickly add or discard capacity as day-to-day
needs change.
Data storage is a $30 billion-per-year business,

acceptance of our flexible services. We are creating

and we know customers would like to purchase it

the risk management building blocks to manage

on an as-needed basis. In January 2001 we com-

almost every element of the network in addition to

pleted our first data storage transactions with a

leading provider of managed storage services,
StorageNetworks, and a large retailer, Best Buy.
Best Buy is buying off-site storage capacity to save
money and gain flexibility to accommodate changing storage needs.
Content Services
In April 2000 Enron signed an agreement with
a U.S. video rental retailer to deliver movies over
the Enron Intelligent Network. The trial service is
up and running in Seattle; Portland, Ore.; Salt Lake
City and New York City. Additionally, we have
established relationships with other high-visibility
content providers. Over the next two or three years,
we plan to deliver on-demand not only movies
but sports, educational content, games, music and

CONNECTIVITY
Enron is facilitating network connectivity by establishing pooling
points in major metropolitan areas
to switch bandwidth from one
independent network to another.
The pooling points help optimize
network capacity by creating common physical delivery points and
access to multiple locations.

DYNAMIC PROVISIONING
Enron’s pooling point infrastructure allows companies to provision
bandwidth quickly, eliminating the
long lead times associated with
circuit provisioning in the past.
Enhanced connectivity and dynamic provisioning allow bandwidth
users to take advantage of bandwidth market opportunities on
short notice.

NETWORK CONTROL
Within Enron’s Broadband Operating
System (BOS) lie several unique
capabilities that monitor switching
activity between networks and
control the provisioning of circuits.
The Enron BOS can measure performance in real time at every
layer of the network and ensure
quality of service and delivery.

SCALABILITY
The Enron Intelligent Network
(EIN) has extensive reach throughout the continental United States
and connects to Europe and Asia.
With its broad connectivity, the
EIN is designed to scale without
the cost of building additional
infrastructure. Leveraging the
EnronOnline platform provides
additional reach and gives customers a new, easy option for
their bandwidth needs.

applications not yet imagined.
Market Innovator
Enron’s innovative approach is as valuable in
broadband as it is in energy. Our proven intermediation skills are creating new value for the industry
and giving it a flexibility it has never enjoyed. We
have combined our business model with readily
available technologies to deliver premium content
over the Enron Intelligent Network in a very comparticular technology. We use the best solution at
the best time for our customers, delivering the
most reliable product at the lowest available cost
in the marketplace.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

pelling commercial model. We are not tied to any

17

ENRON TRANSPORTATION
SERVICES

needs. Northern Natural Gas, for example, has used
interruptible storage products that extend its capability to meet the growing demand for services to

The Gas Pipeline Group formally changed its

manage physical positions. Transwestern Pipeline

name in September 2000 to Enron Transportation

Company is offering shippers increased service

Services to emphasize its ability to deliver innovative

flexibility by accessing third-party storage. Across

solutions to its customers. These emerging services

all pipelines, web-based applications have been

augment our core competency: operating interstate

introduced to allow customers to better manage

pipelines safely and efficiently. In 2000 we continued

transactions and allow the pipelines to maximize

our record of strong returns with consistent earnings

their capacity offerings. Northern Natural Gas,

and cash flow. Income before interest and taxes

Transwestern Pipeline and Florida Gas Transmission

reached $391 million, up from $380 million in 1999.

began to sell available capacity on EnronOnline

Cash flow from operations rose to $415 million

in 2000 to give customers the convenience of

in 2000 from $370 million in 1999. Throughput

eCommerce transacting (see “Purchasing Capacity

remained relatively unchanged in 2000 at 9.13

Through EnronOnline” on this page).

Purchasing Capacity
Through EnronOnline
Enron Transportation Services has introduced several innovative customer services,
including the use of EnronOnline. Northern
Natural Gas, Transwestern Pipeline and

PRICE DISCOVERY
Knowledge helps customers make better
decisions. Prices are fully transparent and
instantly accessible, which allows buyers to
know what their transportation costs will be
when they are buying their gas.

Florida Gas Transmission are selling available firm and interruptible capacity on

OPTIMIZING THE ASSETS
When a pipeline is not totally subscribed,
EnronOnline lets the market know it is available. Pipelines also can auction off highly
desirable capacity by accepting sealed bids.
EnronOnline gives Enron Transportation
Services the ability to put more product in
front of more of its customers than ever
before.

EnronOnline in addition to selling capacity
through traditional methods. Customers
already using EnronOnline to transact gas
can now arrange transportation at the
same time.

billion cubic feet per day (Bcf/d), compared to 9.18
Bcf/d the previous year.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Together, our interstate pipelines span approxi-

18

Northern Natural Gas
Northern Natural Gas, Enron’s largest pipeline,
has approximately 16,500 miles of pipeline extend-

mately 25,000 miles with a peak capacity of 9.8

ing from the Permian Basin in Texas to the Great

Bcf/d. We transport 15 percent of U.S. natural gas

Lakes, providing extensive access to major utilities

demand. We connect to the major supply basins in

and industrials in the upper Midwest. The pipeline

the United States and Canada, and we continue to

has market area peak capacity of 4.3 Bcf/d. It inter-

increase capacity from those basins to our major

connects with major pipelines, including Great

markets. We have added 840 million cubic feet per

Lakes, Transwestern, El Paso, Northern Border and

day (MMcf/d) over the past two years, and nearly 1

Trailblazer, to offer excellent northern, southern

Bcf/d is scheduled to enter service in the next three

and western flow capabilities. Ninety-five percent

years. At the same time, our expense per MMcf/d

of market area capacity is contracted through 2003.

has declined by 26 percent from 1992 to today.
Enron Transportation Services pipelines have

Market area demand is expected to increase
considerably with the development of approximately

brought to market a variety of new products and

2,000 megawatts of gas-fired generation over the

services specifically tailored to address customer

next three years. The pipeline has developed innova-

tive and flexible services to meet the transportation,

under long-term agreements with an average term

storage and balancing needs of power producers. It

of six years. Its Project 2000 extension — 34 miles of

completed construction in October 2000 of a link to

pipe from Manhattan, Illinois, to a point near North

445 megawatts of peaking power operated by Great

Hayden, Indiana — will provide 544 MMcf/d to

River Energy in Minnesota. The link will transport up

industrial markets in Indiana with a targeted in-

to 120 MMcf/d of gas.

service date of late 2001.

Transwestern Pipeline
Transwestern operates approximately 2,500

Late in 2000, Northern Border Pipeline settled
its rate case, allowing it to switch from a cost-of-

miles of pipe with 1.7 Bcf/d of peak capacity. With

service tariff to a stated-rate tariff, which will provide

pipeline originating in the San Juan, Permian and

rate certainty to customers, increase competitiveness

Anadarko Basins, Transwestern can move gas east

and allow flexibility in services provided.

to Texas or west to the California border. To respond

Northern Border Partners also owns interests

to increased gas demand in California, Transwestern

in gathering systems in the Powder River and Wind

Pipeline added compressor facilities near Gallup,

River Basins in Wyoming, and recently signed a letter

New Mexico, in May 2000 to increase mainline

of intent to purchase Bear Paw LLC, which has

capacity by 140 MMcf/d to the California border.

extensive gathering and processing operations in

The new capacity is completely subscribed under

the Powder River Basin and the Williston Basin.

long-term contracts. In 2000 the pipeline also added

The partnership also owns Black Mesa Pipeline, a

several major interconnects to tap into growing

273-mile coal-water slurry pipeline running from

markets east of California.

Kayenta, Arizona, to Mohave Power Station in

The Transwestern system is fully subscribed for
western deliveries through December 2005 and for
eastern deliveries through December 2002. The sys-

Laughlin, Nevada.
Portland General Electric
The sale of Portland General Electric (PGE) to

tem has the potential to quickly increase throughput

Sierra Pacific Resources has been delayed by the

capacity. An expansion project is expected to be filed

effect of recent events in California and Nevada on

this year and completed in 2002.

the buyer. In 2000 the Portland, Oregon-based elec-

Florida Gas Transmission

tricity utility performed well in the face of regional

Florida Gas Transmission serves the rapidly

wholesale price volatility. IBIT rose approximately 12

growing Florida peninsula and connects with 10

percent to $341 million. Total electricity sales reached

major pipelines. It has maintained a competitive

38.4 million megawatt-hours (MWh) compared to

position by staging expansions to keep pace with

31.9 million MWh in 1999. We will continue to drive

demand as it grows. With current peak capacity

performance while we pursue the utility’s sale.

of 1.5 Bcf/d, Florida Gas Transmission will add 600
MMcf/d of capacity when its Phase IV and Phase V
expansions are completed. The Fort Myers extension,
part of a 200 MMcf/d Phase IV expansion, went into
service on October 1, 2000, and the remainder is
scheduled to go into service in May 2001. The 400MMcf/d Phase V expansion has received preliminary
approval from the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission and is expected to be completed in
April 2002.
The 4,795-mile pipeline currently is evaluating
supply connections to two proposed liquefied natural gas facilities.
Northern Border Partners, L.P.
Northern Border Partners, L.P. is a publicly
traded partnership (NYSE: NBP), of which Enron
Partners owns a 70 percent general partner interest
in Northern Border Pipeline, which extends 1,214
miles from the Canadian border in Montana to
Illinois. The pipeline, a low-cost link between
Canadian reserves and the Midwest market, has a
peak capacity of 2.4 Bcf/d and is fully contracted

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

is the largest general partner. Northern Border

19

FINANCIAL REVIEW

CONTENTS
21 MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND
ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION
AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
27 FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
29 INFORMATION REGARDING FORWARDLOOKING STATEMENTS
29 MANAGEMENT’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR
FINANCIAL REPORTING
30 REPORTS OF INDEPENDENT PUBLIC
ACCOUNTANTS
31 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

31 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME

20

32 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET
34 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF
CASH FLOWS
35 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF
CHANGES IN SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
36 ENRON CORP. AND SUBSIDIARIES
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
52 SELECTED FINANCIAL AND CREDIT
INFORMATION (UNAUDITED)

The following review of the results of operations and
financial condition of Enron Corp. and its subsidiaries and
affiliates (Enron) should be read in conjunction with the
Consolidated Financial Statements.

RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated Net Income
Enron’s net income for 2000 was $979 million compared to
$893 million in 1999 and $703 million in 1998. Items impacting
comparability are discussed in the respective segment results. Net
income before items impacting comparability was $1,266 million,
$957 million and $698 million, respectively, in 2000, 1999 and
1998. Enron’s business is divided into five segments and
Exploration and Production (Enron Oil & Gas Company) through
August 16, 1999 (see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial
Statements). Enron’s operating segments include:
Transportation and Distribution. Transportation and
Distribution consists of Enron Transportation Services and
Portland General. Transportation Services includes Enron’s
interstate natural gas pipelines, primarily Northern Natural
Gas Company (Northern), Transwestern Pipeline Company
(Transwestern), Enron’s 50% interest in Florida Gas Transmission
Company (Florida Gas) and Enron’s interests in Northern Border
Partners, L.P. and EOTT Energy Partners, L.P. (EOTT).
Wholesale Services. Wholesale Services includes Enron’s
wholesale businesses around the world. Wholesale Services operates in developed markets such as North America and Europe, as
well as developing or newly deregulating markets including
South America, India and Japan.
Retail Energy Services. Enron, through its subsidiary Enron
Energy Services, LLC (Energy Services), is extending its energy
expertise and capabilities to end-use retail customers in the industrial and commercial business sectors to manage their energy
requirements and reduce their total energy costs.
Broadband Services. Enron’s broadband services business
(Broadband Services) provides customers with a single source for
broadband services, including bandwidth intermediation and the
delivery of premium content.
Corporate and Other. Corporate and Other includes Enron’s
investment in Azurix Corp. (Azurix), which provides water and
wastewater services, results of Enron Renewable Energy Corp.
(EREC), which develops and constructs wind-generated power
projects, and the operations of Enron’s methanol and MTBE
plants as well as overall corporate activities of Enron.

Net income includes the following:
(In millions)
After-tax results before items
impacting comparability

2000

1999

1998

$1,266

$ 957

$ 698

-

-

345
(278)

45
(40)

(131)
$ 893

$ 703

Items impacting comparability: (a)
Charge to reflect impairment by Azurix (326)
Gain on TNPC, Inc. (The New
Power Company), net
39
Gains on sales of subsidiary stock
MTBE-related charges
Cumulative effect of
accounting changes
Net income
$ 979

(a) Tax affected at 35%, except where a specific tax rate applied.

Diluted earnings per share of common stock were as follows:

Diluted earnings per share (a):
After-tax results before items
impacting comparability

2000

1999

1998

$ 1.47

$ 1.18

$ 1.00

0.45
(0.36)

0.07
(0.06)

(0.17)
$ 1.10

$ 1.01

Items impacting comparability:
Charge to reflect impairment by Azurix (0.40)
Gain on The New Power Company, net 0.05
Gains on sales of subsidiary stock
MTBE-related charges
Cumulative effect of
accounting changes
Diluted earnings per share
$ 1.12

(a) Restated to reflect the two-for-one stock split effective August 13, 1999.

Income Before Interest, Minority Interests and Income Taxes
The following table presents income before interest, minority interests and income taxes (IBIT) for each of Enron’s operating
segments (see Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements):
(In millions)
Transportation and Distribution:
Transportation Services
Portland General
Wholesale Services
Retail Energy Services
Broadband Services
Exploration and Production
Corporate and Other
Income before interest,
minority interests and taxes

2000

1999

1998

$ 391
341
2,260
165
(60)
(615)

$ 380
305
1,317
(68)
65
(4)

$ 351
286
968
(119)
128
(32)

$2,482

$1,995

$1,582

Transportation and Distribution
Transportation Services. The following table summarizes
total volumes transported by each of Enron’s interstate natural
gas pipelines.

Total volumes transported (BBtu/d) (a)
Northern Natural Gas
Transwestern Pipeline
Florida Gas Transmission
Northern Border Pipeline

2000

1999

1998

3,529
1,657
1,501
2,443

3,820
1,462
1,495
2,405

4,098
1,608
1,324
1,770

(a) Billion British thermal units per day. Amounts reflect 100% of each entity’s
throughput volumes. Florida Gas and Northern Border Pipeline are unconsolidated equity affiliates.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Management’s Discussion and Analysis
of Financial Condition and Results
of Operations

21

Significant components of IBIT are as follows:
(In millions)
Net revenues
Operating expenses
Depreciation and amortization
Equity earnings
Other, net
Income before interest and taxes

2000
$650
280
67
63
25
$391

1999
$626
264
66
38
46
$380

1998
$640
276
70
32
25
$351

Net Revenues
Revenues, net of cost of sales, of Transportation Services
increased $24 million (4%) during 2000 and declined $14 million
(2%) during 1999 as compared to 1998. In 2000, Transportation
Services’ interstate pipelines produced strong financial results.
The volumes transported by Transwestern increased 13 percent in
2000 as compared to 1999. Northern’s 2000 gross margin was
comparable to 1999 despite an 8 percent decline in volumes
transported. Net revenues in 2000 were favorably impacted by
transportation revenues from Transwestern’s Gallup, New Mexico
expansion and by sales from Northern’s gas storage inventory.
The decrease in net revenue in 1999 compared to 1998 was
primarily due to the expiration, in October 1998, of certain transition cost recovery surcharges, partially offset by a Northern sale
of gas storage inventory in 1999.

Operating Expenses
Operating expenses, including depreciation and amortization, of Transportation Services increased $17 million (5%) during
2000 primarily as a result of higher overhead costs related to
information technology and employee benefits. Operating
expenses decreased $16 million (5%) during 1999 primarily as a
result of the expiration of certain transition cost recovery surcharges which had been recovered through revenues.

Equity Earnings
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated equity affiliates
increased $25 million and $6 million in 2000 and 1999, respectively.
The increase in equity earnings in 2000 as compared to 1999
primarily relates to Enron’s investment in Florida Gas. The increase
in earnings in 1999 as compared to 1998 was primarily a result of
higher earnings from Northern Border Pipeline and EOTT.

Other, Net
Other, net decreased $21 million in 2000 as compared to
1999 after increasing $21 million in 1999 as compared to 1998.
Included in 2000 were gains related to an energy commodity
contract and the sale of compressor-related equipment, while
the 1999 amount included interest income earned in connection
with the financing of an acquisition by EOTT. The 1998 amount
included gains from the sale of an interest in an equity investment, substantially offset by charges related to litigation.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Portland General. Portland General realized IBIT as follows:

22

(In millions)
Revenues
Purchased power and fuel
Operating expenses
Depreciation and amortization
Other, net
Income before interest and taxes

2000
$2,256
1,461
321
211
78
$ 341

1999
$1,379
639
304
181
50
$ 305

1998
$1,196
451
295
183
19
$ 286

Revenues, net of purchased power and fuel costs, increased
$55 million in 2000 as compared to 1999. The increase is primarily
the result of a significant increase in the price of power sold and

an increase in wholesale sales, partially offset by higher purchased
power and fuel costs. Operating expenses increased primarily due
to increased plant maintenance costs related to periodic overhauls.
Depreciation and amortization increased in 2000 primarily as a
result of increased regulatory amortization. Other, net in 2000
included the impact of an Oregon Public Utility Commission
(OPUC) order allowing certain deregulation costs to be deferred
and recovered through rate cases, the settlement of litigation
related to the Trojan nuclear power generating facility and gains
on the sale of certain generation-related assets.
Revenues, net of purchased power and fuel costs, decreased
$5 million in 1999 as compared to 1998. Revenues increased primarily as a result of an increase in the number of customers
served by Portland General. Higher purchased power and fuel
costs, which increased 42 percent in 1999, offset the increase in
revenues. Other income, net increased $31 million in 1999 as
compared to 1998 primarily as a result of a gain recognized on
the sale of certain assets.
In 1999, Enron entered into an agreement to sell Portland
General Electric Company to Sierra Pacific Resources. See Note 2
to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Statistics for Portland General are as follows:

Electricity sales (thousand MWh) (a)
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Total retail
Wholesale
Total electricity sales
Resource mix
Coal
Combustion turbine
Hydro
Total generation
Firm purchases
Secondary purchases
Total resources

2000

1999

1998

7,433
7,527
4,912
19,872
18,548
38,420

7,404
7,392
4,463
19,259
12,612
31,871

7,101
6,781
3,562
17,444
10,869
28,313

11%
12
6
29
63
8
100%

15%
8
9
32
57
11
100%

16%
12
9
37
56
7
100%

Average variable power cost (Mills/KWh) (b)
Generation
14.5
Firm purchases
34.9
Secondary purchases
123.6
Total average variable power cost
37.2

11.3
23.2
19.7
20.0

8.6
17.3
23.6
15.6

Retail customers (end of period, thousands) 725

719

704

(a) Thousand megawatt-hours.
(b) Mills (1/10 cent) per kilowatt-hour.

Outlook
Enron Transportation Services is expected to provide stable
earnings and cash flows during 2001. The four major natural gas
pipelines have strong competitive positions in their respective
markets as a result of efficient operating practices, competitive
rates and favorable market conditions. Enron Transportation
Services expects to continue to pursue demand-driven expansion
opportunities. Florida Gas expects to complete an expansion that
will increase throughput by 198 million cubic feet per day
(MMcf/d) by mid-2001. Florida Gas has received preliminary
approval from the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission for an
expansion of 428 MMcf/d, expected to be completed by early
2003, and is also pursuing an expansion of 150 MMcf/d that is
expected to be completed in mid-2003. Transwestern completed
an expansion of 140 MMcf/d in May 2000 and is pursuing an
expansion of 50 MMcf/d that is expected to be completed in 2001

Wholesale Services
Enron builds its wholesale businesses through the creation
of networks involving selective asset ownership, contractual
access to third-party assets and market-making activities. Each
market in which Wholesale Services operates utilizes these
components in a slightly different manner and is at a different
stage of development. This network strategy has enabled
Wholesale Services to establish a leading position in its markets.
Wholesale Services’ activities are categorized into two business
lines: (a) Commodity Sales and Services and (b) Assets and
Investments. Activities may be integrated into a bundled product
offering for Enron’s customers.
Wholesale Services manages its portfolio of contracts and
assets in order to maximize value, minimize the associated risks
and provide overall liquidity. In doing so, Wholesale Services uses
portfolio and risk management disciplines, including offsetting
or hedging transactions, to manage exposures to market price
movements (commodities, interest rates, foreign currencies and
equities). Additionally, Wholesale Services manages its liquidity
and exposure to third-party credit risk through monetization of
its contract portfolio or third-party insurance contracts.
Wholesale Services also sells interests in certain investments and
other assets to improve liquidity and overall return, the timing of
which is dependent on market conditions and management’s
expectations of the investment’s value.
The following table reflects IBIT for each business line:
(In millions)
Commodity sales and services
Assets and investments
Unallocated expenses
Income before interest,
minority interests and taxes

2000
$1,630
889
(259)

1999
$ 628
850
(161)

1998
$411
709
(152)

$2,260

$1,317

$968

The following discussion analyzes the contributions to IBIT
for each business line.
Commodity Sales and Services. Wholesale Services provides
reliable commodity delivery and predictable pricing to its
customers through forwards and other contracts. This marketmaking activity includes the purchase, sale, marketing and
delivery of natural gas, electricity, liquids and other commodities, as well as the management of Wholesale Services’ own
portfolio of contracts. Contracts associated with this activity are
accounted for using the mark-to-market method of accounting.
See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Wholesale
Services’ market-making activity is facilitated through a network
of capabilities including selective asset ownership. Accordingly,
certain assets involved in the delivery of these services are
included in this business (such as intrastate natural gas pipelines,
gas storage facilities and certain electric generation assets).

Wholesale Services markets, transports and provides energy
commodities as reflected in the following table (including intercompany amounts):

Physical volumes (BBtue/d) (a)(b)
Gas:
United States
Canada
Europe and Other
Transportation volumes
Total gas volumes
Crude oil and Liquids
Electricity (c)
Total physical volumes (BBtue/d)
Electricity volumes (thousand MWh)
United States
Europe and Other
Total
Financial settlements
(notional, BBtue/d)

2000

1999

1998

17,674
6,359
3,637
27,670
649
28,319
6,088
17,308
51,715

8,982
4,398
1,572
14,952
575
15,527
6,160
10,742
32,429

7,418
3,486
1,251
12,155
559
12,714
3,570
11,024
27,308

578,787
54,670
633,457

380,518
11,576
392,094

401,843
529
402,372

196,148

99,337

75,266

(a) Billion British thermal units equivalent per day.
(b) Includes third-party transactions by Enron Energy Services.
(c) Represents electricity volumes, converted to BBtue/d.

Earnings from commodity sales and services increased $1.0
billion (160%) in 2000 as compared to 1999. Increased profits
from North American gas and power marketing operations,
European power marketing operations as well as the value of
new businesses, such as pulp and paper, contributed to the
earnings growth of Enron’s commodity sales and services business. Continued market leadership in terms of volumes transacted, significant increases in natural gas prices and price
volatility in both the gas and power markets were the key
contributors to increased profits in the gas and power intermediation businesses. In late 1999, Wholesale Services launched an
Internet-based eCommerce system, EnronOnline, which allows
wholesale customers to view Enron’s real time pricing and to
complete commodity transactions with Enron as principal, with
no direct interaction. In its first full year of operation,
EnronOnline positively impacted wholesale volumes, which
increased 59 percent over 1999 levels.
Earnings from commodity sales and services increased $217
million (53%) in 1999 as compared to 1998, reflecting strong
results from the intermediation businesses in both North
America and Europe, which include delivery of energy commodities and associated risk management products. Wholesale
Services also successfully managed its overall portfolio of contracts, particularly in minimizing credit exposures utilizing
third-party contracts. New product offerings in coal and pulp
and paper markets also added favorably to the results.
Assets and Investments. Enron’s Wholesale businesses make
investments in various energy and certain related assets as a part
of its network strategy. Wholesale Services either purchases the
asset from a third party or develops and constructs the asset. In
most cases, Wholesale Services operates and manages such
assets. Earnings from these investments principally result from
operations of the assets or sales of ownership interests.
Additionally, Wholesale Services invests in debt and equity
securities of energy and technology-related businesses, which
may also utilize Wholesale Services’ products and services. With
these merchant investments, Enron’s influence is much more
limited relative to assets Enron develops or constructs. Earnings
from these activities, which are accounted for on a fair value
basis and are included in revenues, result from changes in the
market value of the securities. Wholesale Services uses risk

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

and an additional expansion of up to 150 MMcf/d that is expected
to be completed in 2002. Northern Border Partners is evaluating
the development of a 325 mile pipeline with a range of capacity
from 375 MMcf/d to 500 MMcf/d to connect natural gas production in Wyoming to the Northern Border Pipeline in Montana.
In 2001, Portland General anticipates purchased power
and fuel costs to remain at historically high levels. Portland
General has submitted a request with the OPUC to recover the
anticipated cost increase through a rate adjustment.

23

management disciplines, including hedging transactions, to
manage the impact of market price movements on its merchant
investments. See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial
Statements for a summary of these investments.
Earnings from assets and investments increased $39 million
(5%) in 2000 as compared to 1999 as a result of an increase in the
value of Wholesale Services’ merchant investments, partially offset by lower gains from sales of energy assets. Earnings from
asset operations were comparable to 1999 levels. Earnings from
merchant investments were positively impacted by power-related
and energy investments, partially offset by the decline in value
of technology-related and certain energy-intensive industry
investments. Gains on sales of energy assets in 2000 included the
monetization of certain European energy operations.
Earnings from assets and investments increased $141 million
(20%) in 1999 as compared to 1998. During 1999, earnings from
Wholesale Services’ energy-related assets increased, reflecting
the operation of the Dabhol Power Plant in India, ownership in
Elektro Eletricidade e Serviços S.A. (Elektro), a Brazilian electric
utility, and assets in various other developing markets. Wholesale
Services’ merchant investments increased in value during the
year due to the expansion into certain technology-related investments, partially offset by a decline in the value of certain energy
investments. In addition, Wholesale Services’ 1999 earnings
increased due to development and construction activities, while
gains on sales of energy assets declined.
Unallocated Expenses. Net unallocated expenses such as
systems expenses and performance-related costs increased in
2000 due to growth of Wholesale Services’ existing businesses
and continued expansion into new markets.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Outlook

24

In 2000, Wholesale Services reinforced its leading positions
in the natural gas and power markets in both North America and
Europe. In the coming year, Wholesale Services plans to continue
to expand and refine its existing energy networks and to extend
its proven business model to new markets and industries.
In 2001, Wholesale Services plans to continue to fine-tune
its already successful existing energy networks. In North America,
Enron expects to complete the sale of five of its peaking power
plants located in the Midwest and its intrastate natural gas
pipeline. In each case, market conditions, such as increased
liquidity, have diminished the need to own physical assets. For
energy networks in other geographical areas where liquidity may
be an issue, Enron will evaluate whether its existing network will
benefit from additional physical assets. The existing networks in
North America and Europe should continue to provide opportunities for sustained volume growth and increased profits.
The combination of knowledge gained in building networks
in key energy markets and the application of new technology, such
as EnronOnline, is expected to provide the basis to extend
Wholesale Services’ business model to new markets and industries.
In key international markets, where deregulation is underway,
Enron plans to build energy networks by using the optimum
combination of acquiring or constructing physical assets and
securing contractual access to third-party assets. Enron also plans
to replicate its business model to new industrial markets such as
metals, pulp, paper and lumber, coal and steel. Enron expects to
use its eCommerce platform, EnronOnline, to accelerate the penetration into these industries.
Earnings from Wholesale Services are dependent on the
origination and completion of transactions, some of which are
individually significant and which are impacted by market conditions, the regulatory environment and customer relationships.
Wholesale Services’ transactions have historically been based on

a diverse product portfolio, providing a solid base of earnings.
Enron’s strengths, including its ability to identify and respond to
customer needs, access to extensive physical assets and its integrated product offerings, are important drivers of the expected
continued earnings growth. In addition, significant earnings are
expected from Wholesale Services’ commodity portfolio and
investments, which are subject to market fluctuations. External
factors, such as the amount of volatility in market prices, impact
the earnings opportunity associated with Wholesale Services’
business. Risk related to these activities is managed using naturally offsetting transactions and hedge transactions. The effectiveness of Enron’s risk management activities can have a material impact on future earnings. See “Financial Risk Management”
for a discussion of market risk related to Wholesale Services.

Retail Energy Services
Energy Services sells or manages the delivery of natural gas,
electricity, liquids and other commodities to industrial and
commercial customers located in North America and Europe.
Energy Services also provides outsourcing solutions to customers
for full energy management. This integrated product includes
the management of commodity delivery, energy information and
energy assets, and price risk management activities. The commodity portion of the contracts associated with this business are
accounted for under the mark-to-market method of accounting.
See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(In millions)
Revenues
Cost of sales
Operating expenses
Depreciation and amortization
Equity losses
Other, net
IBIT before items impacting
comparability
Items impacting comparability:
Gain on The New Power Company
stock issuance
Retail Energy Services charges
Income (loss) before interest, minority
interests and taxes

2000
$4,615
4,028
449
38
(60)
63

1999
$1,807
1,551
308
29
13

1998
$1,072
955
210
31
(2)
7

103

(68)

(119)

121
(59)

-

-

(68)

$ (119)

$ 165

$

Operating Results
Revenues and gross margin increased $2,808 million and
$331 million, respectively, in 2000 compared to 1999, primarily
resulting from execution of commitments on its existing customer base, long-term energy contracts originated in 2000 and
the increase in the value of Energy Services’ contract portfolio.
Operating expenses increased as a result of costs incurred in
building the capabilities to deliver services on existing customer
contracts and in building Energy Services’ outsourcing business in
Europe. Other, net in 2000 consisted primarily of gains associated with the securitization of non-merchant equity instruments.
Equity losses reflect Energy Services’ portion of losses of The New
Power Company.
Items impacting comparability in 2000 included a pre-tax
gain of $121 million related to the issuance of common stock by
The New Power Company and a charge of $59 million related to
the write-off of certain information technology and other costs.
The New Power Company, which is approximately 45 percent
owned by Enron, was formed to provide electricity and natural
gas to residential and small commercial customers in deregulated
energy markets in the United States.

Broadband Services

Corporate and Other

In implementing Enron’s network strategy, Broadband
Services is constructing the Enron Intelligent Network, a nationwide fiber-optic network that consists of both fiber deployed by
Enron and acquired capacity on non-Enron networks and is managed by Enron’s Broadband Operating System software. Enron is
extending its market-making and risk management skills from its
energy business to develop the bandwidth intermediation business to help customers manage unexpected fluctuation in the
price, supply and demand of bandwidth. Enron’s bandwidth-ondemand platform allows delivery of high-bandwidth media-rich
content such as video streaming, high capacity data transport
and video conferencing. Broadband Services also makes investments in companies with related technologies and with the
potential for capital appreciation. Earnings from these merchant
investments, which are accounted for on a fair value basis and
are included in revenues, result from changes in the market value
of the securities. Broadband Services uses risk management disciplines, including hedging transactions, to manage the impact of
market price movements on its merchant investments.
Broadband Services also sells interests in certain investments and
other assets to improve liquidity and overall return, the timing of
which is dependent on market conditions and management’s
expectations of the investment’s value.
The components of Broadband Services’ businesses include
the development and construction of the Enron Intelligent
Network, sales of excess fiber and software, bandwidth intermediation and the delivery of content. Significant components of
Broadband Services’ results are as follows:

Significant components of Corporate and Other’s IBIT are as
follows:
(In millions)
IBIT before items impacting
comparability

2000

1999

1998

$(289)

$ (17)

$ 7

-

-

454

22

(441)

(61)

$ (4)

$(32)

Items impacting comparability:
Charge to reflect impairment
by Azurix
(326)
Gains on exchange and sales of
Enron Oil & Gas Company (EOG) stock
Charge to reflect impairment of
MTBE assets and losses on
contracted MTBE production
Loss before interest, minority
interests and taxes
$(615)

Broadband Services recognized a loss before interest, minority
interests and taxes of $60 million in 2000. Gross margin included
earnings from sales of excess fiber capacity, a significant increase in
the market value of Broadband Services’ merchant investments and
the monetization of a portion of Enron’s broadband content delivery platform. Expenses incurred during the period include expenses
related to building the business and depreciation and amortization.

Results for Corporate and Other in 2000 reflect operating
losses from Enron’s investment in Azurix (excluding the impairments discussed below) and increased information technology,
employee compensation and corporate-wide expenses.
Results for Corporate and Other in 1999 were impacted by
higher corporate expenses, partially offset by increased earnings
from EREC resulting from increased sales volumes from its
German manufacturing subsidiary and from the completion and
sale of certain domestic wind projects. Enron also recognized
higher earnings related to Azurix. Results in 1998 were favorably impacted by increases in the market value of certain corporate-managed financial instruments, partially offset by higher
corporate expenses.
Items impacting comparability in 2000 included a $326 million charge reflecting Enron’s portion of impairments recorded
by Azurix related to assets in Argentina. Items impacting comparability in 1999 included a pre-tax gain of $454 million on the
exchange and sale of Enron’s interest in EOG (see Note 2 to the
Consolidated Financial Statements) and a $441 million pre-tax
charge for the impairment of its MTBE assets (see Note 17 to the
Consolidated Financial Statements).
During 1998, Enron recognized a pre-tax gain of $22 million
on the delivery of 10.5 million shares of EOG stock held by Enron
as repayment of mandatorily exchangeable debt. Enron also
recorded a $61 million charge to reflect losses on contracted
MTBE production.

Outlook

Interest and Related Charges, Net

Broadband Services is extending Enron’s proven business
model to the communications industry. In 2001, Enron expects to
further develop the Enron Intelligent Network, a global broadband network with broad connectivity potential to both buyers
and sellers of bandwidth through Enron’s pooling points. In addition, Enron expects to further deploy its proprietary Broadband
Operating System across the Enron Intelligent Network, enabling
Enron to manage bandwidth capacity independent of owning the
underlying fiber. Broadband Services expects its intermediation
transaction level to increase significantly in 2001 as more market
participants connect to the pooling points and transact with Enron

Interest and related charges, net of interest capitalized
which totaled $38 million, $54 million and $66 million for 2000,
1999 and 1998, respectively, increased to $838 million in 2000
from $656 million in 1999 and $550 million in 1998. The increase
in 2000 as compared to 1999 was primarily a result of increased
long-term debt levels, increased average short-term borrowings,
short-term debt assumed as a result of the acquisition of MG plc
and higher interest rates in the U.S. The increase was partially
offset by the replacement of debt related to a Brazilian subsidiary with lower interest rate debt.

(In millions)
Gross margin
Operating expenses
Depreciation and amortization
Other, net
Loss before interest, minority interests and taxes

2000
$318
305
77
4
$ (60)

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

During 2001, Energy Services anticipates continued growth
in the demand for retail energy outsourcing solutions. Energy
Services will deliver these services to its existing customers, while
continuing to expand its commercial and industrial customer base
for total energy outsourcing. Energy Services also plans to continue integrating its service delivery capabilities, extend its business
model to related markets and offer new products.

to manage their bandwidth needs. The availability of Enron’s
bandwidth intermediation products and prices on EnronOnline are
expected to favorably impact the volume of transactions. In 2001,
Broadband Services expects to continue to expand the commercial
roll-out of its content service offerings including video-ondemand. Enron expects the volume of content delivered over its
network to increase as more content delivery contracts are signed
and as more distribution partner locations are connected.

Outlook

25

The increase in 1999 as compared to 1998 was primarily due
to debt issuances and debt related to a Brazilian subsidiary, partially offset by a decrease in debt related to EOG following the
sale and exchange of Enron’s interests in August 1999. See Note
2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.

Minority Interests
Minority interests include the following:
(In millions)
Elektro (a)
Majority-owned limited liability
company and limited partnerships
Enron Oil & Gas Company
Other
Total

2000
$ 33

1999
$ 39

1998
$ -

105
16
$154

71
2
23
$135

24
53
$77

(a) Relates to the respective parents of Elektro, which had minority shareholders
in 2000 and 1999. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.

Minority interests include Elektro beginning January 1, 1999,
a majority-owned limited liability company and majority-owned
limited partnerships since their formation during 1998 through
2000 and EOG until the exchange and sale of Enron’s interests in
August 1999 (see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements).

Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense increased in 2000 as compared to 1999
primarily as a result of increased earnings, decreased equity earnings and decreased tax benefits related to the foreign tax rate
differential, partially offset by an increase in the differences
between the book and tax basis of certain assets and stock sales.
Income tax expense decreased in 1999 compared to 1998
primarily as a result of increased equity earnings, tax benefits
related to the foreign tax rate differential and the audit settlement related to Monthly Income Preferred Shares, partially
offset by increased earnings.

Cumulative Effect of Accounting Changes
In 1999, Enron recorded an after-tax charge of $131 million
to reflect the initial adoption (as of January 1, 1999) of two new
accounting pronouncements, the AICPA Statement of Position
98-5 (SOP 98-5), “Reporting on the Costs of Start-Up Activities,”
and the Emerging Issues Task Force Issue No. 98-10, “Accounting
for Contracts Involved in Energy Trading and Risk Management
Activities.” The 1999 charge was primarily related to the adoption of SOP 98-5.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS

26

In 1998, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)
issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No.
133, “Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging
Activities,” which was subsequently amended by SFAS No. 137 and
SFAS No. 138. SFAS No. 133 must be applied to all derivative instruments and certain derivative instruments embedded in hybrid
instruments and requires that such instruments be recorded in the
balance sheet either as an asset or liability measured at its fair
value through earnings, with special accounting allowed for certain qualifying hedges. Enron will adopt SFAS No. 133 as of
January 1, 2001. Due to the adoption of SFAS No. 133, Enron will
recognize an after-tax non-cash loss of approximately $5 million in
earnings and an after-tax non-cash gain in “Other Comprehensive
Income,” a component of shareholders’ equity, of approximately
$22 million from the cumulative effect of a change in accounting
principle. Enron will also reclassify $532 million from “Long-Term
Debt” to “Other Liabilities” due to the adoption.

The total impact of Enron’s adoption of SFAS No. 133 on
earnings and on “Other Comprehensive Income” is dependent
upon certain pending interpretations, which are currently under
consideration, including those related to “normal purchases and
normal sales” and inflation escalators included in certain contract payment provisions. The interpretations of these issues, and
others, are currently under consideration by the FASB. While the
ultimate conclusions reached on interpretations being considered by the FASB could impact the effects of Enron’s adoption of
SFAS No. 133, Enron does not believe that such conclusions
would have a material effect on its current estimate of the
impact of adoption.

FINANCIAL CONDITION
Cash Flows
(In millions)
Cash provided by (used in):
Operating activities
Investing activities
Financing activities

2000

1999

1998

$ 4,779
(4,264)
571

$ 1,228
(3,507)
2,456

$ 1,640
(3,965)
2,266

Net cash provided by operating activities increased $3,551
million in 2000, primarily reflecting decreases in working capital,
positive operating results and a receipt of cash associated with
the assumption of a contractual obligation. Net cash provided
by operating activities decreased $412 million in 1999, primarily
reflecting increases in working capital and net assets from price
risk management activities, partially offset by increased earnings and higher proceeds from sales of merchant assets and
investments. The 1998 amount reflects positive operating cash
flow from Enron’s major business segments, proceeds from sales
of interests in energy-related merchant assets and cash from
timing and other changes related to Enron’s commodity portfolio, partially offset by new investments in merchant assets
and investments.
Net cash used in investing activities primarily reflects capital
expenditures and equity investments, which total $3,314 million
in 2000, $3,085 million in 1999 and $3,564 million in 1998, and
cash used for business acquisitions. See “Capital Expenditures and
Equity Investments” below and see Note 2 to the Consolidated
Financial Statements for cash used for business acquisitions.
Partially offsetting these uses of cash were proceeds from sales of
non-merchant assets, including certain equity instruments by
Energy Services and an international power project, which totaled
$494 million in 2000. Proceeds from non-merchant asset sales
were $294 million in 1999 and $239 million in 1998.
Cash provided by financing activities in 2000 included proceeds from the issuance of subsidiary equity and the issuance of
common stock related to employee benefit plans, partially offset
by payments of dividends. Cash provided by financing activities
in 1999 included proceeds from the net issuance of short- and
long-term debt, the issuance of common stock and the issuance
of subsidiary equity, partially offset by payments of dividends.
Cash provided by financing activities in 1998 included proceeds
from the net issuance of short- and long-term debt, the issuance
of common stock and the sale of a minority interest in a subsidiary, partially offset by payments of dividends.

Capital Expenditures and Equity Investments

CAPITALIZATION

Capital expenditures by operating segment are as follows:

1999
$ 316
1,216
64
226
541
$2,363

1998
$ 310
706
75
690
124
$1,905

Capital expenditures increased $18 million in 2000 and $458
million in 1999 as compared to the previous year. Capital expenditures in 2000 primarily relate to construction of power plants
to extend Wholesale Services’ network and fiber optic network
infrastructure for Broadband Services. During 1999, Wholesale
Services expenditures increased due primarily to construction of
domestic and international power plants. The 1999 increase in
Corporate and Other reflects the purchase of certain previously
leased MTBE-related assets.
Cash used for investments in equity affiliates by the operating segments is as follows:
(In millions)
Transportation and Distribution
Wholesale Services
Corporate and Other
Total

2000
$ 1
911
21
$933

1999
$ 712
10
$722

1998
27
703
929
$1,659

$

Equity investments in 2000 relate primarily to capital invested
for the ongoing construction, by a joint venture, of a power plant
in India as well as other international investments. Equity investments in 1999 relate primarily to an investment in a joint venture
that holds gas distribution and related businesses in South Korea
and the power plant project in India.
The level of spending for capital expenditures and equity
investments will vary depending upon conditions in the energy
and broadband markets, related economic conditions and identified opportunities. Management expects that the capital
spending program will be funded by a combination of internally
generated funds, proceeds from dispositions of selected assets
and short- and long-term borrowings.

Working Capital
At December 31, 2000, Enron had working capital of $2.0
billion. If a working capital deficit should occur, Enron has credit
facilities in place to fund working capital requirements.
At December 31, 2000, those credit lines provided for up to
$4.2 billion of committed and uncommitted credit, of which
$290 million was outstanding. Certain of the credit agreements
contain prefunding covenants. However, such covenants are
not expected to restrict Enron’s access to funds under these
agreements. In addition, Enron sells commercial paper and has
agreements to sell trade accounts receivable, thus providing
financing to meet seasonal working capital needs. Management
believes that the sources of funding described above are sufficient to meet short- and long-term liquidity needs not met by
cash flows from operations.

Total capitalization at December 31, 2000 was $25.0 billion.
Debt as a percentage of total capitalization increased to 40.9
percent at December 31, 2000 as compared to 38.5 percent at
December 31, 1999. The increase in the ratio primarily reflects
increased debt levels and the impact on total equity of the
decline in the value of the British pound sterling. This was partially offset by the issuances, in 2000, of Enron common stock
and the contribution of common shares (see Note 16 to the
Consolidated Financial Statements). The issuances of Enron common stock primarily related to the acquisition of a minority
shareholder’s interest in Enron Energy Services, LLC and the
exercise of employee stock options.
Enron is a party to certain financial contracts which contain
provisions for early settlement in the event of a significant
market price decline in which Enron’s common stock falls below
certain levels (prices ranging from $28.20 to $55.00 per share) or
if the credit ratings for Enron’s unsecured, senior long-term debt
obligations fall below investment grade. The impact of this early
settlement could include the issuance of additional shares of
Enron common stock.
Enron’s senior unsecured long-term debt is currently rated
BBB+ by Standard & Poor’s Corporation and Fitch IBCA and Baa1
by Moody’s Investor Service. Enron’s continued investment grade
status is critical to the success of its wholesale businesses as well
as its ability to maintain adequate liquidity. Enron’s management
believes it will be able to maintain its credit rating.

Financial Risk Management
Wholesale Services offers price risk management services
primarily related to commodities associated with the energy
sector (natural gas, electricity, crude oil and natural gas liquids).
Energy Services and Broadband Services also offer price risk management services to their customers. These services are provided
through a variety of financial instruments including forward
contracts, which may involve physical delivery, swap agreements,
which may require payments to (or receipt of payments from)
counterparties based on the differential between a fixed and
variable price for the commodity, options and other contractual
arrangements. Interest rate risks and foreign currency risks associated with the fair value of Wholesale Services’ commodities
portfolio are managed using a variety of financial instruments,
including financial futures, swaps and options.
On a much more limited basis, Enron’s other businesses also
enter into financial instruments such as forwards, swaps and
other contracts primarily for the purpose of hedging the impact
of market fluctuations on assets, liabilities, production or other
contractual commitments. Changes in the market value of these
hedge transactions are deferred until the gain or loss is recognized on the hedged item.
Enron manages market risk on a portfolio basis, subject to
parameters established by its Board of Directors. Market risks
are monitored by an independent risk control group operating
separately from the units that create or actively manage these
risk exposures to ensure compliance with Enron’s stated risk
management policies.
ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

2001
(In millions)
Estimate
2000
Transportation and Distribution $ 140 $ 270
Wholesale Services
570
1,280
Retail Energy Services
50
70
Broadband Services
700
436
Exploration and Production
Corporate and Other
40
325
Total
$1,500 $2,381

27

Market Risk
The use of financial instruments by Enron’s businesses may
expose Enron to market and credit risks resulting from adverse
changes in commodity and equity prices, interest rates and foreign
exchange rates. For Enron’s businesses, the major market risks are
discussed below:
Commodity Price Risk. Commodity price risk is a consequence
of providing price risk management services to customers. As discussed above, Enron actively manages this risk on a portfolio basis
to ensure compliance with Enron’s stated risk management policies.
Interest Rate Risk. Interest rate risk is also a consequence of
providing price risk management services to customers and having
variable rate debt obligations, as changing interest rates impact
the discounted value of future cash flows. Enron utilizes forwards,
futures, swaps and options to manage its interest rate risk.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk. Foreign currency
exchange rate risk is the result of Enron’s international operations
and price risk management services provided to its worldwide
customer base. The primary purpose of Enron’s foreign currency
hedging activities is to protect against the volatility associated
with foreign currency purchase and sale transactions. Enron primarily utilizes forward exchange contracts, futures and purchased
options to manage Enron’s risk profile.
Equity Risk. Equity risk arises from Enron’s participation in
investments. Enron generally manages this risk by hedging specific investments using futures, forwards, swaps and options.
Enron evaluates, measures and manages the market risk in
its investments on a daily basis utilizing value at risk and other
methodologies. The quantification of market risk using value at
risk provides a consistent measure of risk across diverse markets
and products. The use of these methodologies requires a number of key assumptions including the selection of a confidence
level for expected losses, the holding period for liquidation and
the treatment of risks outside the value at risk methodologies,
including liquidity risk and event risk. Value at risk represents an
estimate of reasonably possible net losses in earnings that
would be recognized on its investments assuming hypothetical
movements in future market rates and no change in positions.
Value at risk is not necessarily indicative of actual results which
may occur.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Value at Risk

28

Enron has performed an entity-wide value at risk analysis of
virtually all of Enron’s financial instruments, including price risk
management activities and merchant investments. Value at risk
incorporates numerous variables that could impact the fair value
of Enron’s investments, including commodity prices, interest
rates, foreign exchange rates, equity prices and associated
volatilities, as well as correlation within and across these
variables. Enron estimates value at risk for commodity, interest
rate and foreign exchange exposures using a model based on
Monte Carlo simulation of delta/gamma positions which captures
a significant portion of the exposure related to option positions.
The value at risk for equity exposure discussed above is based on
J.P. Morgan’s RiskMetrics™ approach. Both value at risk methods
utilize a one-day holding period and a 95% confidence level.
Cross-commodity correlations are used as appropriate.
The use of value at risk models allows management to
aggregate risks across the company, compare risk on a consistent
basis and identify the drivers of risk. Because of the inherent
limitations to value at risk, including the use of delta/gamma
approximations to value options, subjectivity in the choice of
liquidation period and reliance on historical data to calibrate the
models, Enron relies on value at risk as only one component in its
risk control process. In addition to using value at risk measures,

Enron performs regular stress and scenario analyses to estimate
the economic impact of sudden market moves on the value of its
portfolios. The results of the stress testing, along with the professional judgment of experienced business and risk managers,
are used to supplement the value at risk methodology and capture additional market-related risks, including volatility, liquidity
and event, concentration and correlation risks.
The following table illustrates the value at risk for each
component of market risk:
December 31,

Year ended December 31, 2000
High

(In millions)

Trading Market Risk:
Commodity price (b)
Interest rate
Foreign currency
exchange rate
Equity (c)

Low

Average (a) Valuation (a) Valuation (a)

2000

1999

$66
-

$21
-

$50
-

$81
-

$23
-

59

26

45

59

36

1
2

2
1

5
2

2
-

4
3

8
6

10
7

4
5

Non-Trading Market Risk (d):
Commodity price
2
Interest rate
Foreign currency
exchange rate
8
Equity
7

(a) The average value presents a twelve month average of the month-end values.
The high and low valuations for each market risk component represent the
highest and lowest month-end value during 2000.
(b) In 2000, increased natural gas prices combined with increased price volatility in
power and gas markets caused Enron’s value at risk to increase significantly.
(c) Enron’s equity trading market risk primarily relates to merchant investments
(see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). In 2000, the value at risk
model utilized for equity trading market risk was refined to more closely correlate with the valuation methodologies used for merchant activities.
(d) Includes only the risk related to the financial instruments that serve as hedges
and does not include the related underlying hedged item.

Accounting Policies
Accounting policies for price risk management and hedging
activities are described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial
Statements.

Management’s Responsibility for Financial
Reporting

This Report includes forward-looking statements within the
meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section
21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. All statements other
than statements of historical facts contained in this document
are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements
include, but are not limited to, statements relating to expansion
opportunities for the Transportation Services, extension of
Enron’s business model to new markets and industries, demand
in the market for broadband services and high bandwidth
applications, transaction volumes in the U.S. power market, commencement of commercial operations of new power plants and
pipeline projects, completion of the sale of certain assets and
growth in the demand for retail energy outsourcing solutions.
When used in this document, the words “anticipate,” “believe,”
“estimate,” “expects,” “intend,” “may,” “project,” “plan,”
“should” and similar expressions are intended to be among the
statements that identify forward-looking statements. Although
Enron believes that its expectations reflected in these forwardlooking statements are based on reasonable assumptions, such
statements involve risks and uncertainties and no assurance can
be given that actual results will be consistent with these forwardlooking statements. Important factors that could cause actual
results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking
statements herein include success in marketing natural gas and
power to wholesale customers; the ability of Enron to penetrate
new retail natural gas and electricity markets (including energy
outsourcing markets) in the United States and foreign jurisdictions; development of Enron’s broadband network and customer
demand for intermediation and content services; the timing,
extent and market effects of deregulation of energy markets in
the United States, including the current energy market conditions in California, and in foreign jurisdictions; other regulatory
developments in the United States and in foreign countries,
including tax legislation and regulations; political developments
in foreign countries; the extent of efforts by governments to
privatize natural gas and electric utilities and other industries;
the timing and extent of changes in commodity prices for crude
oil, natural gas, electricity, foreign currency and interest rates;
the extent of success in acquiring oil and gas properties and in
discovering, developing, producing and marketing reserves; the
timing and success of Enron’s efforts to develop international
power, pipeline and other infrastructure projects; the effectiveness of Enron’s risk management activities; the ability of counterparties to financial risk management instruments and other
contracts with Enron to meet their financial commitments to
Enron; and Enron’s ability to access the capital markets and equity markets during the periods covered by the forward-looking
statements, which will depend on general market conditions and
Enron’s ability to maintain the credit ratings for its unsecured
senior long-term debt obligations.

The following financial statements of Enron Corp. and subsidiaries (collectively, Enron) were prepared by management,
which is responsible for their integrity and objectivity. The statements have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted
accounting principles and necessarily include some amounts that
are based on the best estimates and judgments of management.
The system of internal controls of Enron is designed to
provide reasonable assurance as to the reliability of financial
statements and the protection of assets from unauthorized
acquisition, use or disposition. This system is augmented by
written policies and guidelines and the careful selection and
training of qualified personnel. It should be recognized, however,
that there are inherent limitations in the effectiveness of any
system of internal control. Accordingly, even an effective internal
control system can provide only reasonable assurance with
respect to the preparation of reliable financial statements and
safeguarding of assets. Further, because of changes in conditions,
internal control system effectiveness may vary over time.
Enron assessed its internal control system as of December 31,
2000, 1999 and 1998, relative to current standards of control
criteria. Based upon this assessment, management believes that
its system of internal controls was adequate during the periods to
provide reasonable assurance as to the reliability of financial
statements and the protection of assets against unauthorized
acquisition, use or disposition.
Arthur Andersen LLP was engaged to audit the financial
statements of Enron and issue reports thereon. Their audits
included developing an overall understanding of Enron’s
accounting systems, procedures and internal controls and conducting tests and other auditing procedures sufficient to support
their opinion on the financial statements. Arthur Andersen LLP
was also engaged to examine and report on management’s
assertion about the effectiveness of Enron’s system of internal
controls. The Reports of Independent Public Accountants appear
in this Annual Report.
The adequacy of Enron’s financial controls and the accounting principles employed in financial reporting are under the
general oversight of the Audit Committee of Enron Corp.’s Board
of Directors. No member of this committee is an officer or
employee of Enron. The independent public accountants have
direct access to the Audit Committee, and they meet with the
committee from time to time, with and without financial management present, to discuss accounting, auditing and financial
reporting matters.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Information Regarding Forward-Looking
Statements

29

Reports Of Independent Public Accountants
To the Shareholders and Board of Directors of Enron Corp.:

To the Shareholders and Board of Directors of Enron Corp.:

We have examined management’s assertion that the system
of internal control of Enron Corp. (an Oregon corporation) and
subsidiaries as of December 31, 2000, 1999 and 1998 was
adequate to provide reasonable assurance as to the reliability of
financial statements and the protection of assets from unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition, included in the accompanying report on Management’s Responsibility for Financial
Reporting. Management is responsible for maintaining effective
internal control over the reliability of financial statements and
the protection of assets against unauthorized acquisition, use or
disposition. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on
management’s assertion based on our examination.
Our examinations were made in accordance with attestation standards established by the American Institute of Certified
Public Accountants and, accordingly, included obtaining an
understanding of the system of internal control, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of the system of
internal control and such other procedures as we considered
necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our examinations
provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Because of inherent limitations in any system of internal
control, errors or irregularities may occur and not be detected.
Also, projections of any evaluation of the system of internal
control to future periods are subject to the risk that the system
of internal control may become inadequate because of changes
in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies
or procedures may deteriorate.
In our opinion, management’s assertion that the system of
internal control of Enron Corp. and its subsidiaries as of
December 31, 2000, 1999 and 1998 was adequate to provide reasonable assurance as to the reliability of financial statements and
the protection of assets from unauthorized acquisition, use or
disposition is fairly stated, in all material respects, based upon
current standards of control criteria.

We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance
sheet of Enron Corp. (an Oregon corporation) and subsidiaries as
of December 31, 2000 and 1999, and the related consolidated
statements of income, comprehensive income, cash flows and
changes in shareholders’ equity for each of the three years in the
period ended December 31, 2000. These financial statements are
the responsibility of Enron Corp.’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these financial statements based
on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States. Those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of
material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test
basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the
financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made
by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial
statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above
present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of
Enron Corp. and subsidiaries as of December 31, 2000 and 1999,
and the results of their operations, cash flows and changes in
shareholders’ equity for each of the three years in the period
ended December 31, 2000, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States.
As discussed in Note 18 to the consolidated financial statements, Enron Corp. and subsidiaries changed its method of
accounting for costs of start-up activities and its method of
accounting for certain contracts involved in energy trading and
risk management activities in the first quarter of 1999.

Arthur Andersen LLP
Arthur Andersen LLP

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Houston, Texas
February 23, 2001

30

Houston, Texas
February 23, 2001

Enron Corp. and Subsidiaries Consolidated Income Statement
Year ended December 31,
1999

1998

$ 50,500
33,823
9,234
7,232
100,789

$19,536
15,238
5,338
40,112

$13,276
13,939
4,045
31,260

Costs and Expenses
Cost of gas, electricity, metals and other products
Operating expenses
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Taxes, other than income taxes
Impairment of long-lived assets
Total costs and expenses

94,517
3,184
855
280
98,836

34,761
3,045
870
193
441
39,310

26,381
2,473
827
201
29,882

Operating Income

1,953

802

1,378

Other Income and Deductions
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated equity affiliates
Gains on sales of non-merchant assets
Gains on the issuance of stock by TNPC, Inc.
Interest income
Other income, net
Income Before Interest, Minority Interests and Income Taxes

87
146
121
212
(37)
2,482

309
541
162
181
1,995

97
56
88
(37)
1,582

838
77
154
434
979
979

656
76
135
104
1,024
(131)
893

550
77
77
175
703
703

(In millions, except per share amounts)
Revenues
Natural gas and other products
Electricity
Metals
Other
Total revenues

2000

Interest and related charges, net
Dividends on company-obligated preferred securities of subsidiaries
Minority interests
Income tax expense
Net income before cumulative effect of accounting changes
Cumulative effect of accounting changes, net of tax
Net Income
Preferred stock dividends
Earnings on Common Stock
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
Basic
Before cumulative effect of accounting changes
Cumulative effect of accounting changes
Basic earnings per share
Diluted
Before cumulative effect of accounting changes
Cumulative effect of accounting changes
Diluted earnings per share
Average Number of Common Shares Used in Computation
Basic
Diluted

$

$
$
$
$

83
896

$

66
827

1.22
1.22

1.36
(0.19)
$ 1.17

$

1.12
1.12

$

$

736
814

$

$

1.27
(0.17)
$ 1.10
705
769

$

$

17
686

1.07
1.07
1.01
1.01
642
695

(In millions)
Net Income
Other comprehensive income:
Foreign currency translation adjustment and other
Total Comprehensive Income

$

2000
979

Year ended December 31,
1999
$ 893

1998
$ 703

$

(307)
672

(579)
$ 314

(14)
$ 689

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Enron Corp. and Subsidiaries Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income

31

Enron Corp. and Subsidiaries Consolidated Balance Sheet
December 31,
(In millions, except shares)
ASSETS

2000

1999

Current Assets
Cash and cash equivalents

$ 1,374

$

288

Trade receivables (net of allowance for doubtful
accounts of $133 and $40, respectively)

10,396

3,030

Other receivables

1,874

518

Assets from price risk management activities

12,018

2,205
598

Inventories

953

Deposits

2,433

81

Other

1,333

535

30,381

7,255

Investments in and advances to unconsolidated equity affiliates

5,294

5,036

Assets from price risk management activities

8,988

2,929

Total current assets
Investments and Other Assets

Goodwill

3,638

2,799

Other

5,459

4,681

23,379

15,445

Natural gas transmission

6,916

6,948

Electric generation and distribution

4,766

3,552

Total investments and other assets
Property, Plant and Equipment, at cost

Fiber-optic network and equipment

839

379

Construction in progress

682

1,120

Other
Less accumulated depreciation, depletion and amortization
Property, plant and equipment, net
Total Assets

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.

32

2,256

1,913

15,459

13,912

3,716

3,231

11,743

10,681

$65,503

$33,381

December 31,
2000

1999

$ 9,777
10,495
1,679
4,277
2,178
28,406

$ 2,154
1,836
1,001
44
1,724
6,759

Long-Term Debt

8,550

7,151

Deferred Credits and Other Liabilities
Deferred income taxes
Liabilities from price risk management activities
Other
Total deferred credits and other liabilities

1,644
9,423
2,692
13,759

1,894
2,990
1,587
6,471

2,414

2,430

904

1,000

124

130

LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities
Accounts payable
Liabilities from price risk management activities
Short-term debt
Customers’ deposits
Other
Total current liabilities

Minority Interests
Company-Obligated Preferred Securities of Subsidiaries
Shareholders’ Equity
Second preferred stock, cumulative, no par value, 1,370,000 shares authorized,
1,240,933 shares and 1,296,184 shares issued, respectively
Mandatorily Convertible Junior Preferred Stock, Series B,
no par value, 250,000 shares issued
Common stock, no par value, 1,200,000,000 shares authorized,
752,205,112 shares and 716,865,081 shares issued, respectively
Retained earnings
Accumulated other comprehensive income
Common stock held in treasury, 577,066 shares and 1,337,714 shares, respectively
Restricted stock and other
Total shareholders’ equity

1,000

1,000

8,348
3,226
(1,048)
(32)
(148)
11,470

6,637
2,698
(741)
(49)
(105)
9,570

Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity

$65,503

$33,381

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Commitments and Contingencies (Notes 13, 14 and 15)

33

Enron Corp. and Subsidiaries Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
(In millions)
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
Reconciliation of net income to net cash provided by operating activities
Net income
Cumulative effect of accounting changes
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Impairment of long-lived assets (including equity investments)
Deferred income taxes
Gains on sales of non-merchant assets
Changes in components of working capital
Net assets from price risk management activities
Merchant assets and investments:
Realized gains on sales
Proceeds from sales
Additions and unrealized gains
Other operating activities
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Cash Flows From Investing Activities
Capital expenditures
Equity investments
Proceeds from sales of non-merchant assets
Acquisition of subsidiary stock
Business acquisitions, net of cash acquired (see Note 2)
Other investing activities
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
Issuance of long-term debt
Repayment of long-term debt
Net increase (decrease) in short-term borrowings
Net issuance (redemption) of company-obligated
preferred securities of subsidiaries
Issuance of common stock
Issuance of subsidiary equity
Dividends paid
Net disposition of treasury stock
Other financing activities
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Increase (Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and Cash Equivalents, Beginning of Year
Cash and Cash Equivalents, End of Year
Changes in Components of Working Capital
Receivables
Inventories
Payables
Other
Total

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.

34

2000

$

979
855
326
207
(146)
1,769
(763)

Year ended December 31,
1999

$

893
131
870
441
21
(541)
(1,000)
(395)

1998

$

703
827
87
(82)
(233)
350

(104)
1,838
(1,295)
1,113
4,779

(756)
2,217
(827)
174
1,228

(628)
1,434
(721)
(97)
1,640

(2,381)
(933)
494
(485)
(777)
(182)
(4,264)

(2,363)
(722)
294
(311)
(405)
(3,507)

(1,905)
(1,659)
239
(180)
(104)
(356)
(3,965)

3,994
(2,337)
(1,595)

1,776
(1,837)
1,565

1,903
(870)
(158)

(96)
307
500
(523)
327
(6)
571

852
568
(467)
139
(140)
2,456

8
867
828
(414)
13
89
2,266

1,086
288
$ 1,374

$

177
111
288

(59)
170
111

$(8,203)
1,336
7,167
1,469
$ 1,769

$ (662)
(133)
(246)
41
$(1,000)

$

$(1,055)
(372)
433
761
$ (233)

Enron Corp. and Subsidiaries Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity
(In millions, except per share
amounts; shares in thousands)
Cumulative Second Preferred Convertible Stock
Balance, beginning of year
Exchange of convertible preferred stock for common stock
Balance, end of year
Mandatorily Convertible Junior Preferred Stock, Series B
Balance, beginning of year
Issuances
Balance, end of year
Common Stock
Balance, beginning of year
Exchange of convertible preferred stock for common stock
Issuances related to benefit
and dividend reinvestment plans
Sales of common stock
Issuances of common stock in business acquisitions
(see Note 2)
Other
Balance, end of year
Retained Earnings
Balance, beginning of year
Net income
Cash dividends
Common stock ($0.5000, $0.5000 and $0.4812
per share in 2000, 1999 and 1998, respectively)
Cumulative Second Preferred Convertible Stock
($13.652, $13.652 and $13.1402 per share in 2000,
1999 and 1998, respectively)
Series A and B Preferred Stock
Balance, end of year
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
Balance, beginning of year
Translation adjustments and other
Balance, end of year
Treasury Stock
Balance, beginning of year
Shares acquired
Exchange of convertible preferred stock for common stock
Issuances related to benefit and dividend reinvestment plans
Issuances of treasury stock in business acquisitions
Balance, end of year
Restricted Stock and Other
Balance, beginning of year
Issuances related to benefit and dividend reinvestment plans
Balance, end of year
Total Shareholders’ Equity

2000
Shares
Amount

1999
Shares
Amount

1998
Shares
Amount

1,296
(55)
1,241

130
(6)
124

1,320
(24)
1,296

$ 132
(2)
$ 130

1,338
(18)
1,320

250
250

$ 1,000
$ 1,000

250
250

$
1,000
$1,000

-

716,865
1,509

$ 6,637
6

671,094
465

$5,117
(1)

636,594
-

$4,224
(7)

28,100
-

966
-

10,054
27,600

258
839

34,500

45
836

5,731
752,205

409
330
$ 8,348

7,652
716,865

250
174
$6,637

671,094

19
$5,117

$
$

$
$

-

$ 2,698
979

$2,226
893

$1,852
703

(368)

(355)

(312)

(17)
(66)
$ 3,226

(17)
(49)
$2,698

(17)
$2,226

$

$ (162)
(579)
$ (741)

$ (148)
(14)
$ (162)

(741)
(307)
$ (1,048)
(1,338)
(3,114)
3,875
(577)

$ 134
(2)
$ 132

$

$
$

(49)
(234)
251
(32)

(105)
(43)
$ (148)
$11,470

(9,334)
(1,845)
181
9,660
(1,338)

$ (195)
(71)
4
213
$ (49)
$

(70)
(35)
$ (105)
$9,570

(14,102)
(2,236)
486
6,426
92
(9,334)

$ (269)
(61)
9
124
2
$ (195)
$ (175)
105
$ (70)
$7,048

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.

35

Enron Corp. and Subsidiaries Notes to the
Consolidated Financial Statements
1

SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES

Consolidation Policy and Use of Estimates
The accounting and financial reporting policies of Enron
Corp. and its subsidiaries conform to generally accepted accounting principles and prevailing industry practices. The consolidated
financial statements include the accounts of all subsidiaries
controlled by Enron Corp. after the elimination of significant
intercompany accounts and transactions.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with
generally accepted accounting principles requires management to
make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported
amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent
assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and
the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the
reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
“Enron” is used from time to time herein as a collective
reference to Enron Corp. and its subsidiaries and affiliates. The
businesses of Enron are conducted by its subsidiaries and affiliates whose operations are managed by their respective officers.

Cash Equivalents
Enron records as cash equivalents all highly liquid short-term
investments with original maturities of three months or less.

Inventories
Inventories consist primarily of commodities, priced at market
as such inventories are used in trading activities.

Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization
The provision for depreciation and amortization with
respect to operations other than oil and gas producing activities
is computed using the straight-line or regulatorily mandated
method, based on estimated economic lives. Composite depreciation rates are applied to functional groups of property having
similar economic characteristics. The cost of utility property units
retired, other than land, is charged to accumulated depreciation.
Provisions for depreciation, depletion and amortization of
proved oil and gas properties are calculated using the units-ofproduction method.

Income Taxes
Enron accounts for income taxes using an asset and liability
approach under which deferred assets and liabilities are recognized based on anticipated future tax consequences attributable
to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of
assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases (see Note 5).

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Earnings Per Share

36

Basic earnings per share is computed based upon the
weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
during the periods. Diluted earnings per share is computed based
upon the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding plus the assumed issuance of common shares for all
potentially dilutive securities. All share and per share amounts
have been adjusted to reflect the August 13, 1999 two-for-one
stock split. See Note 11 for a reconciliation of the basic and diluted earnings per share computations.

Accounting for Price Risk Management
Enron engages in price risk management activities for both
trading and non-trading purposes. Instruments utilized in connection with trading activities are accounted for using the markto-market method. Under the mark-to-market method of
accounting, forwards, swaps, options, energy transportation contracts utilized for trading activities and other instruments with
third parties are reflected at fair value and are shown as “Assets
and Liabilities from Price Risk Management Activities” in the
Consolidated Balance Sheet. These activities also include the
commodity risk management component embedded in energy
outsourcing contracts. Unrealized gains and losses from newly
originated contracts, contract restructurings and the impact of
price movements are recognized as “Other Revenues.” Changes
in the assets and liabilities from price risk management activities
result primarily from changes in the valuation of the portfolio of
contracts, newly originated transactions and the timing of settlement relative to the receipt of cash for certain contracts. The
market prices used to value these transactions reflect management’s best estimate considering various factors including closing
exchange and over-the-counter quotations, time value and
volatility factors underlying the commitments.
Financial instruments are also utilized for non-trading
purposes to hedge the impact of market fluctuations on assets,
liabilities, production and other contractual commitments.
Hedge accounting is utilized in non-trading activities when there
is a high degree of correlation between price movements in the
derivative and the item designated as being hedged. In instances
where the anticipated correlation of price movements does not
occur, hedge accounting is terminated and future changes in
the value of the financial instruments are recognized as gains or
losses. If the hedged item is sold, the value of the financial
instrument is recognized in income. Gains and losses on financial
instruments used for hedging purposes are recognized in the
Consolidated Income Statement in the same manner as the
hedged item.
The cash flow impact of financial instruments is reflected as
cash flows from operating activities in the Consolidated
Statement of Cash Flows. See Note 3 for further discussion of
Enron’s price risk management activities.

Accounting for Development Activity
Development costs related to projects, including costs of
feasibility studies, bid preparation, permitting, licensing and contract negotiation, are expensed as incurred until the project is
estimated to be probable. At that time, such costs are capitalized
or expensed as incurred, based on the nature of the costs
incurred. Capitalized development costs may be recovered
through reimbursements from joint venture partners or other
third parties, or classified as part of the investment and recovered through the cash flows from that project. Accumulated
capitalized project development costs are otherwise expensed in
the period that management determines it is probable that the
costs will not be recovered.

Environmental Expenditures
Expenditures that relate to an existing condition caused by
past operations, and do not contribute to current or future
revenue generation, are expensed. Environmental expenditures
relating to current or future revenues are expensed or capitalized
as appropriate based on the nature of the costs incurred. Liabilities
are recorded when environmental assessments and/or clean-ups
are probable and the costs can be reasonably estimated.

Direct costs of materials and services consumed in developing
or obtaining software, including payroll and payroll-related costs
for employees who are directly associated with and who devote
time to the software project are capitalized. Costs may begin to be
capitalized once the application development stage has begun. All
other costs are expensed as incurred. Enron amortizes the costs on
a straight-line basis over the useful life of the software.
Impairment is evaluated based on changes in the expected usefulness of the software. At December 31, 2000 and 1999, Enron has
capitalized, net of amortization, $381 million and $240 million,
respectively, of software costs covering numerous systems, including trading and settlement, accounting, billing, and upgrades.

Investments in Unconsolidated Affiliates
Investments in unconsolidated affiliates are accounted for
by the equity method, except for certain investments resulting
from Enron’s merchant investment activities which are included
at market value in “Other Investments” in the Consolidated
Balance Sheet. See Notes 4 and 9. Where acquired assets are
accounted for under the equity method based on temporary control, earnings or losses are recognized only for the portion of the
investment to be retained.

Sale of Subsidiary Stock
Enron accounts for the issuance of stock by its subsidiaries in
accordance with the Securities and Exchange Commission’s Staff
Accounting Bulletin (SAB) 51. SAB 51 allows for Enron to recognize a gain in the amount that the offering price per share of a
subsidiary’s stock exceeds Enron’s carrying amount per share.

Foreign Currency Translation
For international subsidiaries, asset and liability accounts
are translated at year-end rates of exchange and revenue and
expenses are translated at average exchange rates prevailing
during the year. For subsidiaries whose functional currency is
deemed to be other than the U.S. dollar, translation adjustments
are included as a separate component of other comprehensive
income and shareholders’ equity. Currency transaction gains and
losses are recorded in income.
During 1999, the exchange rate for the Brazilian real to the
U.S. dollar declined, resulting in a non-cash foreign currency
translation adjustment reducing the value of Enron’s assets and
shareholders’ equity by approximately $600 million.

Reclassifications
Certain reclassifications have been made to the consolidated
financial statements for prior years to conform with the current
presentation.

2

BUSINESS ACQUISITIONS AND DISPOSITIONS

In 2000, Enron, through a wholly-owned subsidiary,
acquired all of the outstanding common shares of MG plc, a
leading independent international metals market-making
business that provides financial and marketing services to the
global metals industry, for $413 million in cash and assumed
debt of approximately $1.6 billion.
In addition, Enron made other acquisitions including a
technology-related company, a facility maintenance company
and all minority shareholders’ interests in Enron Energy Services,
LLC and Enron Renewable Energy Corp. Enron issued 5.7 million
shares of Enron common stock, contributed common stock and
warrants of an unconsolidated equity affiliate and paid cash in
these transactions.

On August 16, 1999, Enron exchanged approximately 62.3
million shares (approximately 75%) of the Enron Oil & Gas
Company (EOG) common stock it held for all of the stock of
EOGI-India, Inc., a subsidiary of EOG. Also in August 1999, Enron
received net proceeds of approximately $190 million for the sale
of 8.5 million shares of EOG common stock in a public offering
and issued approximately $255 million of public debt that is
exchangeable in July 2002 into approximately 11.5 million shares
of EOG common stock. As a result of the share exchange and
share sale, Enron recorded a pre-tax gain of $454 million ($345
million after tax, or $0.45 per diluted share) in 1999. As of August
16, 1999, EOG is no longer included in Enron’s consolidated
financial statements. EOGI-India, Inc. is included in the consolidated financial statements within the Wholesale Services
segment following the exchange and sale. Enron accounts for its
oil and gas exploration and production activities under the successful efforts method of accounting.
In August 1998, Enron, through a wholly-owned subsidiary,
completed the acquisition of a controlling interest in Elektro
Eletricidade e Serviços S.A. (Elektro) for approximately $1.3 billion. Elektro was initially accounted for using the equity method
based on temporary control. In 1999, after the acquisition of
additional interests, Elektro was consolidated by Enron.
Additionally, during 1999 and 1998, Enron acquired generation, natural gas distribution, renewable energy, telecommunications and energy management businesses for cash, Enron and
subsidiary stock and notes.
Enron has accounted for these acquisitions using the purchase method of accounting as of the effective date of each
transaction. Accordingly, the purchase price of each transaction
has been allocated based upon the estimated fair value of the
assets and liabilities acquired as of the acquisition date, with the
excess reflected as goodwill in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
This and all other goodwill is being amortized on a straight-line
basis over 5 to 40 years.
Assets acquired, liabilities assumed and consideration paid
as a result of businesses acquired were as follows:

(In millions)
Fair value of assets acquired,
other than cash
Goodwill
Fair value of liabilities assumed
Common stock of Enron issued and
equity of an unconsolidated
equity affiliate contributed
Net cash paid

2000

1999

1998(a)

$ 2,641
963
(2,418)

$ 376
(71)
6

$ 269
94
(259)

(409)
777

$ 311

$ 104

$

(a) Excludes amounts related to the 1998 acquisition of Elektro.

On November 8, 1999, Enron announced that it had entered
into an agreement to sell Enron’s wholly-owned electric utility
subsidiary, Portland General Electric Company (PGE), to Sierra
Pacific Resources for $2.1 billion. Sierra Pacific Resources will also
assume approximately $1 billion in PGE debt and preferred stock.
The transaction has been delayed by the effect of recent events
in California and Nevada on the buyer. Enron’s carrying amount
of PGE as of December 31, 2000 was approximately $1.6 billion.
Income before interest, minority interest and income taxes for
PGE was $338 million, $298 million and $284 million for 2000,
1999 and 1998, respectively.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Computer Software

37

3

PRICE RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES AND FINANCIAL
INSTRUMENTS

Fair Value. The fair value as of December 31, 2000 and the
average fair value of instruments related to price risk management activities held during the year are set forth below:

Trading Activities
Enron offers price risk management services to wholesale,
commercial and industrial customers through a variety of financial and other instruments including forward contracts involving
physical delivery, swap agreements, which require payments to
(or receipt of payments from) counterparties based on the differential between a fixed and variable price for the commodity,
options and other contractual arrangements. Interest rate risks
and foreign currency risks associated with the fair value of the
commodity portfolio are managed using a variety of financial
instruments, including financial futures.

(a) Computed using the ending balance at each month-end.

The income before interest, taxes and certain unallocated
expenses arising from price risk management activities for 2000
was $1,899 million.

Fixed Price
Payor

Securitizations. From time to time, Enron sells interests in
certain of its financial assets. Some of these sales are completed
in securitizations, in which Enron concurrently enters into swaps
associated with the underlying assets which limits the risks
assumed by the purchaser. Such swaps are adjusted to fair value
using quoted market prices, if available, or estimated fair value
based on management’s best estimate of the present value of
future cash flow. These swaps are included in Price Risk
Management activities above as equity investments. During
2000, gains from sales representing securitizations were $381
million and proceeds were $2,379 million ($545 million of the
proceeds related to sales to Whitewing Associates, L.P.
(Whitewing)). See Notes 4 and 9. Purchases of securitized merchant financial assets totaled $1,184 million during 2000.
Amounts primarily related to equity interests.

Fixed Price
Maximum
Receiver Terms in Years

7,331
3,513
2,424

6,910
1,990
2,388

23
6
24

368
167

413
325

9
11

$4,732
$ 79
$2,998

$3,977
$ 465
$3,768

29
22
13

(a) Natural gas, crude oil and liquids and electricity volumes are in TBtue; metals,
coal and pulp and paper volumes are in millions of metric tonnes; and bandwidth
volumes are in thousands of terabytes.
(b) The interest rate fixed price receiver includes the net notional dollar value of
the interest rate sensitive component of the combined commodity portfolio.
The remaining interest rate fixed price receiver and the entire interest rate fixed
price payor represent the notional contract amount of a portfolio of various
financial instruments used to hedge the net present value of the commodity
portfolio. For a given unit of price protection, different financial instruments
require different notional amounts.
(c) Excludes derivatives on Enron common stock. See Notes 10 and 11.

Enron also has sales and purchase commitments associated
with commodity contracts based on market prices totaling 8,169
TBtue, with terms extending up to 16 years, and 7.2 million
metric tonnes, with terms extending up to 5 years.
Notional amounts reflect the volume of transactions but do
not represent the amounts exchanged by the parties to the
financial instruments. Accordingly, notional amounts do not
accurately measure Enron’s exposure to market or credit risks.
The maximum terms in years detailed above are not indicative of
likely future cash flows as these positions may be offset in the
markets at any time in response to the company’s price risk
management needs to the extent available in the market.
The volumetric weighted average maturity of Enron’s fixed
price portfolio as of December 31, 2000 was approximately 1.5 years.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Average Fair Value
for the Year Ended
12/31/00 (a)
Assets Liabilities
$ 5,525
$ 5,114
1,402
2,745
3,453
1,613
988
757
492
280
$11,860
$10,509

Notional Amounts and Terms. The notional amounts and
terms of these instruments at December 31, 2000 are shown
below (dollars in millions):

Commodities (a)
Natural gas
Crude oil and liquids
Electricity
Metals, coal and
pulp and paper
Bandwidth
Financial products
Interest rate (b)
Foreign currency
Equity investments (c)

38

(In millions)
Natural gas
Crude oil and liquids
Electricity
Other commodities
Equity investments
Total

Fair Value
as of 12/31/00
Assets Liabilities
$10,270
$ 9,342
1,549
3,574
7,335
5,396
1,509
1,311
795
295
$21,458
$19,918

Credit Risk. In conjunction with the valuation of its financial
instruments, Enron provides reserves for credit risks associated
with such activity. Credit risk relates to the risk of loss that Enron
would incur as a result of nonperformance by counterparties
pursuant to the terms of their contractual obligations. Enron
maintains credit policies with regard to its counterparties that
management believes significantly minimize overall credit risk.
These policies include an evaluation of potential counterparties’
financial condition (including credit rating), collateral requirements under certain circumstances and the use of standardized
agreements which allow for the netting of positive and negative
exposures associated with a single counterparty. Enron also minimizes this credit exposure using monetization of its contract
portfolio or third-party insurance contracts.

2000
Investment
Grade (a) Total
$ 5,050 $ 5,327
4,677
6,124
4,145
4,917

(In millions)
Gas and electric utilities
Energy marketers
Financial institutions
Independent power
producers
672
791
Oil and gas producers
1,308
2,804
Industrials
607
1,138
Other
256
357
Total
$16,715 21,458
Credit and other reserves
(452)
Assets from price risk
management activities (b)
$21,006 (c)

1999
Investment
Grade (a) Total
$1,461 $1,510
544
768
1,016
1,273
471
379
336
59
$4,266

641
688
524
67
5,471
(337)
$5,134

(a) “Investment Grade” is primarily determined using publicly available credit ratings along with consideration of cash, standby letters of credit, parent company guarantees and property interests, including oil and gas reserves. Included
in “Investment Grade” are counterparties with a minimum Standard & Poor’s
or Moody’s rating of BBB- or Baa3, respectively.
(b) One and two customers’ exposures, respectively, at December 31, 2000 and
1999 comprise greater than 5% of Assets From Price Risk Management
Activities and are included above as Investment Grade.
(c) At December 31, 2000, Enron held collateral of approximately $5.5 billion,
which consists substantially of cash deposits shown as “Customers’ Deposits”
on the balance sheet.

This concentration of counterparties may impact Enron’s
overall exposure to credit risk, either positively or negatively, in
that the counterparties may be similarly affected by changes
in economic, regulatory or other conditions. Based on Enron’s
policies, its exposures and its credit reserves, Enron does not
anticipate a materially adverse effect on financial position or
results of operations as a result of counterparty nonperformance.
During 2000, the California power market was significantly
impacted by the increase in wholesale power prices. California
customer rates are currently frozen, requiring the utilities to
finance the majority of their power purchases. If wholesale prices
remain at the current levels and no regulatory relief or legislative
assistance is obtained, certain California utilities may need to
seek bankruptcy protection. During 2000, Enron entered into
wholesale power transactions with California utilities, including
their nonregulated power marketing affiliates. Enron has provided credit reserves related to such activities based on Enron’s
net position with each California utility. Due to the uncertainties
surrounding the California power situation, management cannot
predict the ultimate outcome but believes these matters will not
have a material adverse impact on Enron’s financial condition.

Non-Trading Activities
Enron also enters into financial instruments such as swaps
and other contracts primarily for the purpose of hedging the
impact of market fluctuations on assets, liabilities, production or
other contractual commitments.
Energy Commodity Price Swaps. At December 31, 2000,
Enron was a party to energy commodity price swaps covering 18.6
TBtu, 29.9 TBtu and 0.5 TBtu of natural gas for the years 2001,
2002 and 2003, respectively, and 0.3 million barrels of crude oil for
the year 2001.
Interest Rate Swaps. At December 31, 2000, Enron had
entered into interest rate swap agreements with an aggregate
notional principal amount of $1.0 billion to manage interest
rate exposure. These swap agreements are scheduled to termi-

nate $0.4 billion in 2001 and $0.6 billion in the period 2002
through 2010.
Foreign Currency Contracts. At December 31, 2000, foreign
currency contracts with a notional principal amount of $1.4
billion were outstanding. These contracts will expire $1.0 billion
in 2001 and $0.4 billion in the period 2002 through 2006.
Equity Contracts. At December 31, 2000, Enron had entered
into Enron common stock swaps, with an aggregate notional
amount of $121 million, to hedge certain incentive-based
compensation plans. Such contracts will expire in 2001.
Credit Risk. While notional amounts are used to express the
volume of various financial instruments, the amounts potentially
subject to credit risk, in the event of nonperformance by the
third parties, are substantially smaller. Forwards, futures and
other contracts are entered into with counterparties who are
equivalent to investment grade. Accordingly, Enron does not
anticipate any material impact to its financial position or results
of operations as a result of nonperformance by the third parties
on financial instruments related to non-trading activities.

Financial Instruments
The carrying amounts and estimated fair values of Enron’s
financial instruments, excluding trading activities, at December 31,
2000 and 1999 were as follows:
2000
1999
Carrying Estimated Carrying Estimated
Amount Fair Value Amount Fair Value

(In millions)
Short- and long-term
debt (Note 7)
$10,229
Company-obligated
preferred securities of
subsidiaries (Note 10)
904
Energy commodity
price swaps
Interest rate swaps
Foreign currency contracts
Equity contracts
15

$10,217

$8,152

$8,108

920

1,000

937

68
1
94
15

4

(3)
(55)
4

Enron uses the following methods and assumptions in estimating fair values: (a) short- and long-term debt - the carrying
amount of variable-rate debt approximates fair value, the fair
value of marketable debt is based on quoted market prices and
the fair value of other debt is based on the discounted present
value of cash flows using Enron’s current borrowing rates;
(b) company-obligated preferred securities of subsidiaries - the
fair value is based on quoted market prices, where available, or
based on the discounted present value of cash flows using
Enron’s current borrowing rates if not publicly traded; and
(c) energy commodity price swaps, interest rate swaps, foreign
currency contracts and equity contracts - estimated fair values
have been determined using available market data and valuation
methodologies. Judgment is necessarily required in interpreting
market data and the use of different market assumptions
or estimation methodologies may affect the estimated fair
value amounts.
The fair market value of cash and cash equivalents, trade
and other receivables, accounts payable and investments
accounted for at fair value are not materially different from their
carrying amounts.
Guarantees of liabilities of unconsolidated entities and
residual value guarantees have no carrying value and fair values
which are not readily determinable (see Note 15).

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

The counterparties associated with assets from price risk
management activities as of December 31, 2000 and 1999 are
summarized as follows:

39

4

MERCHANT ACTIVITIES

An analysis of the composition of Enron’s merchant investments
and energy assets at December 31, 2000 and 1999 is as follows:
December 31,
2000
1999

(In millions)
Merchant investments (a)
Energy
Energy-intensive industries
Technology-related
Other
Merchant assets (b)
Independent power plants
Natural gas transportation

Total

$137
63
99
302
601

$ 516
218
11
341
1,086

53
36
89

152
35
187

$690

$1,273

(a) Investments are recorded at fair value in “Other Assets” with changes in fair
value reflected in “Other Revenues.”
(b) Amounts represent Enron’s investment in unconsolidated equity affiliates with operating earnings reflected in “Equity in Earnings of Unconsolidated Equity Affiliates.”

Enron provides capital primarily to energy and technologyrelated businesses seeking debt or equity financing. The merchant
investments made by Enron and certain of its unconsolidated
affiliates (see Note 9) are carried at fair value and include public
and private equity, government securities with maturities of more
than 90 days, debt and interests in limited partnerships. The valuation methodologies utilize market values of publicly-traded
securities, independent appraisals and cash flow analyses.
Also included in Enron’s wholesale business are investments
in merchant assets such as power plants and natural gas
pipelines, primarily held through equity method investments.
Some of these assets were developed, constructed and operated
by Enron. The merchant assets are not expected to be long-term,
integrated components of Enron’s energy networks.
For the years ended December 31, 2000, 1999 and 1998,
respectively, pre-tax gains from sales of merchant assets and
investments totaling $104 million, $756 million and $628 million
are included in “Other Revenues,” and proceeds were $1,838
million, $2,217 million and $1,434 million.

5

INCOME TAXES
The components of income before income taxes are as follows:

(In millions)
United States
Foreign

2000
$ 640
773
$1,413

1999
$ 357
771
$1,128

1998
$197
681
$878

Total income tax expense is summarized as follows:

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

(In millions)
Payable currently
Federal
State
Foreign

40

Payment deferred
Federal
State
Foreign
Total income tax expense (a)

2000

1999

1998

$112
22
93
227

$ 29
6
48
83

$ 30
8
50
88

13
14
180
207
$434

(159)
23
157
21
$104

(14)
11
90
87
$175

(a) See Note 11 for tax benefits related to stock options exercised by employees
reflected in shareholders’ equity.

The differences between taxes computed at the U.S. federal
statutory tax rate and Enron’s effective income tax rate are
as follows:

Statutory federal income
tax provision
Net state income taxes
Foreign tax rate differential
Equity earnings
Basis and stock sale differences
Goodwill amortization
Audit settlement related to Monthly
Income Preferred Shares
Other

2000

1999

1998

35.0%
2.5
(2.4)
5.3
(11.9)
1.6

35.0%
1.8
(7.0)
(10.1)
(10.8)
1.6

35.0%
1.7
0.8
(4.3)
(14.2)
2.0

0.6
30.7%

(1.8)
0.5
9.2%

(1.0)
20.0%

The principal components of Enron’s net deferred income
tax liability are as follows:

(In millions)
Deferred income tax assets
Alternative minimum tax credit carryforward
Net operating loss carryforward
Other
Deferred income tax liabilities
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Price risk management activities
Other
Net deferred income tax liabilities (a)

December 31,
2000
1999
$ 254
369
189
812

$ 220
1,302
188
1,710

1,813
(182)
963
2,594
$1,782

1,807
1,133
782
3,722
$2,012

(a) Includes $138 million and $118 million in other current liabilities for 2000 and
1999, respectively.

Enron has an alternative minimum tax (AMT) credit carryforward of approximately $254 million which can be used to
offset regular income taxes payable in future years. The AMT
credit has an indefinite carryforward period.
Enron has a net operating loss carryforward applicable to
U.S. subsidiaries of approximately $65 million, which will begin
to expire in 2011. Enron has a net operating loss carryforward
applicable to non-U.S. subsidiaries of approximately $1.2 billion,
of which $1.0 billion can be carried forward indefinitely. The
remaining $200 million expires between the years 2001 and
2010. Deferred tax assets have been recognized on the $65
million domestic loss and $1.0 billion of the foreign losses.
U.S. and foreign income taxes have been provided for earnings of foreign subsidiary companies that are expected to be
remitted to the U.S. Foreign subsidiaries’ cumulative undistributed earnings of approximately $1.8 billion are considered to be
permanently reinvested outside the U.S. and, accordingly, no U.S.
income taxes have been provided thereon. In the event of a
distribution of those earnings in the form of dividends, Enron
may be subject to both foreign withholding taxes and U.S.
income taxes net of allowable foreign tax credits.

Detailed information on long-term debt is as follows:

SUPPLEMENTAL CASH FLOW INFORMATION

Cash paid for income taxes and interest expense, including
fees incurred on sales of accounts receivable, is as follows:
(In millions)
Income taxes (net of refunds)
Interest (net of amounts capitalized)

2000
$ 62
834

1999
$ 51
678

1998
$ 73
585

Non-Cash Activity
In 2000, Enron acquired all minority shareholders’ interests
in Enron Energy Services, LLC and other businesses with Enron
common stock. See Note 2.
In 2000 and 1999, Enron entered into various transactions
with related parties, which resulted in an exchange of assets and
an increase in common stock of $171 million in 2000. See Note 16.
In 2000, a partnership in which Enron was a limited partner
made a liquidating distribution to Enron resulting in a non-cash
increase in current assets of $220 million, a decrease of $20
million in non-current assets and an increase in current liabilities
of $160 million.
During 2000 and 1999, Enron received the rights to specific
third-party fiber-optic cable in exchange for the rights on specific fiber-optic cable held for sale by Enron. These exchanges
resulted in non-cash increases in assets of $69 million and $111
million, respectively.
During 1999, Enron issued approximately 7.6 million shares
of common stock in connection with the acquisition, by an
unconsolidated equity affiliate, of interests in three power plants
in New Jersey.
In December 1998, Enron extinguished its 6.25% Exchangeable Notes with 10.5 million shares of EOG common stock.

7

CREDIT FACILITIES AND DEBT

Enron has credit facilities with domestic and foreign banks
which provide for an aggregate of $1.4 billion in long-term
committed credit, of which $150 million relates to Portland
General, and $2.4 billion in short-term committed credit. Expiration
dates of the committed facilities range from February 2001 to May
2005. Interest rates on borrowings are based upon the London
Interbank Offered Rate, certificate of deposit rates or other shortterm interest rates. Certain credit facilities contain covenants which
must be met to borrow funds. Such debt covenants are not anticipated to materially restrict Enron’s ability to borrow funds under
such facilities. Compensating balances are not required, but Enron
is required to pay a commitment or facility fee. At December 31,
2000, $290 million was outstanding under these facilities.
Enron has also entered into agreements which provide for
uncommitted lines of credit totaling $420 million at December 31,
2000. The uncommitted lines have no stated expiration dates.
Neither compensating balances nor commitment fees are required,
as borrowings under the uncommitted credit lines are available
subject to agreement by the participating banks. At December 31,
2000, no amounts were outstanding under the uncommitted lines.
In addition to borrowing from banks on a short-term basis,
Enron and certain of its subsidiaries sell commercial paper to provide financing for various corporate purposes. As of December 31,
2000 and 1999, short-term borrowings of $15 million and $330 million, respectively, and long-term debt due within one year of
$1,303 million and $670 million, respectively, have been reclassified as long-term debt based upon the availability of committed
credit facilities with expiration dates exceeding one year and management’s intent to maintain such amounts in excess of one year.
Weighted average interest rates on short-term debt outstanding
at December 31, 2000 and 1999 were 6.9% and 6.4%, respectively.

(In millions)
Enron Corp.
Senior debentures
6.75% to 8.25% due 2005 to 2012
Notes payable(a)
7.00% exchangeable notes due 2002
6.40% to 9.88% due 2001 to 2028
Floating rate notes due 2000 to 2005
Other
Northern Natural Gas Company
Notes payable
6.75% to 7.00% due 2005 to 2011
Transwestern Pipeline Company
Notes payable
9.20% due 2004
Portland General
First mortgage bonds
6.47% to 9.46% due 2000 to 2023
Pollution control bonds
Various rates due 2010 to 2033
Other
Other
Amount reclassified from short-term debt
Unamortized debt discount and premium
Total long-term debt

December 31,
2000
1999

$ 262

$ 318

532
4,416
92
242

239
4,114
79
34

500

500

11

15

328

373

200
282
414
1,318
(47)
$8,550

200
129
204
1,000
(54)
$7,151

(a) Includes debt denominated in foreign currencies of approximately $955 million
and $525 million, respectively, at December 31, 2000 and 1999. Enron has
entered into derivative transactions to hedge interest rate and foreign currency
exchange fluctuations associated with such debt. See Note 3.

The indenture securing Portland General’s First Mortgage
Bonds constitutes a direct first mortgage lien on substantially all
electric utility property and franchises, other than expressly
excepted property.
The aggregate annual maturities of long-term debt outstanding at December 31, 2000 were $2,112 million, $750 million,
$852 million, $646 million and $1,592 million for 2001 through
2005, respectively.
In February 2001, Enron issued $1.25 billion zero coupon
convertible senior notes that mature in 2021. The notes carry a 2.125
percent yield to maturity with an aggregate face value of $1.9 billion
and may be converted, upon certain contingencies being met, into
Enron common stock at an initial conversion premium of 45 percent.

8

MINORITY INTERESTS

Enron’s minority interests at December 31, 2000 and 1999
include the following:
(In millions)
Majority-owned limited liability company
and limited partnerships
Elektro (a)
Other

2000

1999

$1,759
462
193
$2,414

$1,773
475
182
$2,430

(a) Relates to the respective parents of Elektro, which had minority shareholders in
2000 and 1999.

Enron has formed separate limited partnerships and a limited
liability company with third-party investors for various purposes.
These entities are included in Enron’s consolidated financial
statements, with the third-party investors’ interests reflected in
“Minority Interests” in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
In October 2000, Enron contributed approximately $1.0 billion of net assets to a wholly-owned limited liability company. A
third party contributed $500 million for a preferred membership

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

6

41

interest in the limited liability company. The contribution by
the third party was invested in highly liquid investment grade
securities (including Enron notes) and short-term receivables.
At December 31, 2000, the majority-owned limited liability company held net assets of $1.0 billion.
During 1999, third-party investors contributed cash and
merchant investments totaling $1.0 billion to Enron-sponsored
entities to invest in highly liquid investment grade securities
(including Enron notes) and short-term receivables. The merchant investments, totaling $500 million, were sold prior to
December 31, 1999. During 2000, Enron acquired a portion of the
minority shareholder’s interest for $485 million.
In 1998, Enron formed a wholly-owned limited partnership
for the purpose of holding $1.6 billion of assets contributed by
Enron. That partnership contributed $850 million of assets and a
third party contributed $750 million to a second newly-formed
limited partnership. The assets held by the wholly-owned limited
partnership represent collateral for a $750 million note receivable
held by the second limited partnership. In 2000 and 1999, the
wholly-owned and second limited partnerships sold assets valued
at approximately $152 million and $460 million, respectively, and
invested the proceeds in Enron notes.
Absent certain defaults or other specified events, Enron has
the option to acquire the minority holders’ interests in these
partnerships. Enron has the option to acquire the minority holder’s interest in the limited liability company after November
2002. If Enron does not acquire the minority holders’ interests
before December 2004 through May 2009, or earlier upon certain
specified events, the minority interest holders may cause the
entities to liquidate their assets and dissolve.
In 2000, as part of a restructuring, Jacaré Electrical
Distribution Trust (Jacaré) sold a 47 percent interest in Enron
Brazil Power Holdings V Ltd, a subsidiary that holds its investment in Elektro, to Whitewing for approximately $460 million.
See Note 9. The proceeds were used to acquire the original
minority shareholder’s interest in Jacaré.
In 2000, Enron acquired all minority shareholders’ interests
in Enron Energy Services, LLC and Enron Renewable Energy Corp.
See Note 2.

Summarized combined financial information of Enron’s
unconsolidated affiliates is presented below:

9

(a) Enron recognized revenues from transactions with unconsolidated equity affiliates of $510 million in 2000, $674 million in 1999 and $563 million in 1998.

UNCONSOLIDATED EQUITY AFFILIATES

Enron’s investment in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates which are accounted for by the equity method is as follows:

(In millions)
Azurix Corp.
Bridgeline Holdings
Citrus Corp.
Dabhol Power Company
Joint Energy Development
Investments L.P. (JEDI) (b)
Joint Energy Development
Investments II L.P. (JEDI II) (b)
SK – Enron Co. Ltd.
Transportadora de Gas del Sur S.A.
Whitewing Associates, L.P. (b)
ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Other

42

Net
Voting
Interest (a)
34%
40%
50%
50%
50%
50%
50%
35%
50%

December 31,
2000
1999
$ 325
$ 762
229
530
480
693
466
399

211

220
162
258
269
479
452
558
662
1,603
1,572
$5,294(c) $5,036 (c)

(a) Certain investments have income sharing ratios which differ from Enron’s
voting interests.
(b) JEDI and JEDI II account for their investments at fair value. Whitewing accounts for
certain of its investments at fair value. These affiliates held fair value investments totaling $1,823 million and $1,128 million, respectively, at December 31, 2000 and 1999.
(c) At December 31, 2000 and 1999, the unamortized excess of Enron’s investment
in unconsolidated affiliates was $182 million and $179 million, respectively,
which is being amortized over the expected lives of the investments.

Enron’s equity in earnings (losses) of unconsolidated equity
affiliates is as follows:
(In millions)
Azurix Corp.(a)
Citrus Corp.
Dabhol Power Company
Joint Energy Development
Investments L.P.
Joint Energy Development
Investments II, L.P.
TNPC, Inc. (The New Power Company)
Transportadora de Gas del Sur S.A.
Whitewing Associates, L.P.
Other

2000
$(428)
50
51

1999
$ 23
25
30

1998
$ 6
23
-

197

11

(45)

58
(60)
38
58
123
$ 87

92
32
9
87
$309

(4)
36
81
$ 97

(a) During the fourth quarter of 2000, Azurix Corp. (Azurix) impaired the carrying
value of its Argentine assets, resulting in a charge of approximately $470 million.
Enron’s portion of the charge was $326 million.

December 31,
2000
1999

(In millions)
Balance sheet
Current assets (a)
Property, plant and equipment, net
Other noncurrent assets
Current liabilities (a)
Long-term debt (a)

$ 5,884
14,786
13,485
4,739
9,717
6,148
13,551

Other noncurrent liabilities
Owners’ equity

$ 3,168
14,356
9,459
4,401
8,486
2,402
11,694

(a) Includes $410 million and $327 million receivable from Enron and $302 million
and $84 million payable to Enron at December 31, 2000 and 1999, respectively.

(In millions)
Income statement (a)
Operating revenues
Operating expenses
Net income
Distributions paid to Enron

2000

1999

1998

$15,903
14,710
586
137

$11,568
9,449
1,857
482

$8,508
7,244
142
87

In 2000 and 1999, Enron sold approximately $632 million
and $192 million, respectively, of merchant investments and
other assets to Whitewing. Enron recognized no gains or losses
in connection with these transactions. Additionally, in 2000, ECT
Merchant Investments Corp., a wholly-owned Enron subsidiary,
contributed two pools of merchant investments to a limited
partnership that is a subsidiary of Enron. Subsequent to the
contributions, the partnership issued partnership interests
representing 100% of the beneficial, economic interests in the
two asset pools, and such interests were sold for a total of $545
million to a limited liability company that is a subsidiary of
Whitewing. See Note 3. These entities are separate legal entities
from Enron and have separate assets and liabilities. In 2000 and
1999, the Related Party, as described in Note 16, contributed $33
million and $15 million, respectively, of equity to Whitewing. In
2000, Whitewing contributed $7.1 million to a partnership
formed by Enron, Whitewing and a third party. Subsequently,
Enron sold a portion of its interest in the partnership through a
securitization. See Note 3.
In 2000, The New Power Company sold warrants convertible
into common stock of The New Power Company for $50 million
to the Related Party (described in Note 16).
From time to time, Enron has entered into various administrative service, management, construction, supply and operating

10

PREFERRED STOCK

Preferred Stock
Enron has authorized 16,500,000 shares of preferred stock,
no par value. At December 31, 2000, Enron had outstanding
1,240,933 shares of Cumulative Second Preferred Convertible Stock
(the Convertible Preferred Stock), no par value. The Convertible
Preferred Stock pays dividends at an amount equal to the higher
of $10.50 per share or the equivalent dividend that would be paid
if shares of the Convertible Preferred Stock were converted to
common stock. Each share of the Convertible Preferred Stock is
convertible at any time at the option of the holder thereof into
27.304 shares of Enron’s common stock, subject to certain adjustments. The Convertible Preferred Stock is currently subject to
redemption at Enron’s option at a price of $100 per share plus
accrued dividends. During 2000, 1999 and 1998, 55,251 shares,
23,664 shares and 17,797 shares, respectively, of the Convertible
Preferred Stock were converted into common stock.
In 1999, all outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock
held by Whitewing were exchanged for 250,000 shares of Enron
Mandatorily Convertible Junior Preferred Stock, Series B (Series B
Preferred Stock). Also in 1999, Enron entered into a Share
Settlement Agreement under which Enron could be obligated,
under certain circumstances, to deliver additional shares of
common stock or Series B Preferred Stock to Whitewing for the
amount that the market price of the converted Enron common
shares is less than $28 per share. In 2000, Enron increased the
strike price in the Share Settlement Agreement to $48.55 per
share in exchange for an additional capital contribution in
Whitewing by third-party investors. The number of shares of
Series B Preferred Stock authorized equals the number of shares
necessary to satisfy Enron’s obligation under the Share Settlement
Agreement. Absent certain defaults or other specified events,
Enron has the option to acquire the third-party investors’ interests. If Enron does not acquire the third-party investors’ interests
before January 2003, or earlier upon certain specified events,
Whitewing may liquidate its assets and dissolve. At December 31,
2000, Enron had outstanding 250,000 shares of Series B Preferred
Stock with a liquidation value of $1.0 billion. The Series B
Preferred Stock pays semi-annual cash dividends at an annual rate
of 6.50%. Each share of Series B Preferred Stock is mandatorily
convertible into 200 shares of Enron common stock on January 15,
2003 or earlier upon the occurrence of certain events.
In connection with the 1998 financial restructuring (yielding
proceeds of approximately $1.2 billion) of Enron’s investment in
Azurix, Enron committed to cause the sale of Enron convertible
preferred stock, if certain debt obligations of the related entity
which acquired an interest in Azurix, are defaulted upon, or in
certain events, including, among other things, Enron’s credit
ratings fall below specified levels. If the sale of the convertible
preferred stock is not sufficient to retire such obligations, Enron
would be liable for the shortfall. Such obligations will mature in
December 2001. The number of common shares issuable upon
conversion is based on future common stock prices.

Company-Obligated Preferred Securities of Subsidiaries
Summarized information for Enron’s company-obligated
preferred securities of subsidiaries is as follows:

(In millions, except per
share amounts and shares)
Enron Capital LLC
8% Cumulative Guaranteed
Monthly Income Preferred
Shares (8,550,000 shares) (a)

December 31,
2000
1999

Liquidation
Value
Per Share

$214

$ 214

$ 25

Enron Capital Trust I
8.3% Trust Originated Preferred
Securities (8,000,000 preferred
securities) (a)

200

200

25

Enron Capital Trust II
8 1/8% Trust Originated Preferred
Securities (6,000,000 preferred
securities) (a)

150

150

25

-

200

1,000

LNG Power II L.L.C.
6.74% Preference Units
(105,000 shares) (b)

105

-

1,000

Enron Equity Corp.
8.57% Preferred Stock (880 shares) (a)
7.39% Preferred Stock (150 shares) (a)(c)

88
15

88
15

100,000
100,000

Enron Capital Resources, L.P.
9% Cumulative Preferred Securities,
Series A (3,000,000 preferred
securities) (a)

75

75

25

57
$904

58
$1,000

Enron Capital Trust III
Adjustable-Rate Capital Trust Securities
(200,000 preferred securities)

Other

(a) Redeemable under certain circumstances after specified dates.
(b) Initial rate is 6.74% increasing to 7.79%.
(c) Mandatorily redeemable in 2006.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

agreements with its unconsolidated equity affiliates. Enron’s
management believes that its existing agreements and transactions are reasonable compared to those which could have been
obtained from third parties.

43

11

COMMON STOCK

Derivative Instruments

Earnings Per Share
The computation of basic and diluted earnings per share is
as follows:

(In millions, except per share amounts)
Numerator:
Basic
Income before cumulative effect
of accounting changes
Preferred stock dividends:
Second Preferred Stock
Series A Preferred Stock
Series B Preferred Stock
Income available to common shareholders before cumulative effect
of accounting changes
Cumulative effect of accounting
changes
Income available to common
shareholders
Diluted
Income available to common shareholders before cumulative effect
of accounting changes
Effect of assumed conversion of
dilutive securities (a):
Second Preferred Stock
Income before cumulative effect
of accounting changes
Cumulative effect of accounting
changes
Income available to common shareholders after assumed conversions
Denominator:
Denominator for basic earnings per
share - weighted-average shares
Effect of dilutive securities:
Preferred stock
Stock options
Dilutive potential common shares
Denominator for diluted earnings per
share - adjusted weighted-average
shares and assumed conversions
Basic earnings per share:
Before cumulative effect of
accounting changes
Cumulative effect of accounting
changes
Basic earnings per share
Diluted earnings per share:
Before cumulative effect of
accounting changes
Cumulative effect of accounting
changes
Diluted earnings per share

Year Ended December 31,
2000
1999
1998

$ 979

$1,024

$ 703

(17)
(66)

(17)
(30)
(19)

(17)
-

896

958

686

-

(131)

-

$ 896

$ 827

$ 686

$ 896

$ 958

$ 686

17

17

17

913

975

703

-

(131)

-

$ 913

$ 844

$ 703

736

705

642

35
43
78

36
28
64

36
17
53

814

769

695

$1.22

$ 1.36

$1.07

$1.22

(0.19)
$ 1.17

$1.07

$1.12

$ 1.27

$1.01

$1.12

(0.17)
$ 1.10

$1.01

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

(a) The Series A Preferred Stock and the Series B Preferred Stock were not included
in the calculation of diluted earnings per share because conversion of these
shares would be antidilutive.

44

At December 31, 2000, Enron had derivative instruments
(excluding amounts disclosed in Note 10) on 54.8 million shares
of Enron common stock, of which approximately 12 million
shares are with JEDI and 22.5 million are with related parties
(see Note 16), at an average price of $67.92 per share on which
Enron was a fixed price payor. Shares potentially deliverable to
counterparties under the contracts are assumed to be outstanding in calculating diluted earnings per share unless they are
antidilutive. At December 31, 2000, there were outstanding
non-employee options to purchase 6.4 million shares of Enron
common stock at an exercise price of $19.59 per share.

Stock Option Plans
Enron applies Accounting Principles Board (APB) Opinion 25
and related interpretations in accounting for its stock option
plans. In accordance with APB Opinion 25, no compensation
expense has been recognized for the fixed stock option plans.
Compensation expense charged against income for the restricted
stock plan for 2000, 1999 and 1998 was $220 million, $131 million
and $58 million, respectively. Had compensation cost for Enron’s
stock option compensation plans been determined based on the
fair value at the grant dates for awards under those plans,
Enron’s net income and earnings per share would have been
$886 million ($1.09 per share basic, $1.01 per share diluted) in
2000, $827 million ($1.08 per share basic, $1.01 per share diluted)
in 1999 and $674 million ($1.02 per share basic, $0.97 per share
diluted) in 1998.
The fair value of each option grant is estimated on the date
of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model with
weighted-average assumptions for grants in 2000, 1999 and
1998, respectively: (i) dividend yield of 2.4%, 2.4% and 2.5%; (ii)
expected volatility of 22.3%, 20.0% and 18.3%; (iii) risk-free
interest rates of 5.8%, 5.6% and 5.0%; and (iv) expected lives of
3.2 years, 3.7 years and 3.8 years.
Enron has four fixed option plans (the Plans) under which
options for shares of Enron’s common stock have been or may be
granted to officers, employees and non-employee members of
the Board of Directors. Options granted may be either incentive
stock options or nonqualified stock options and are granted at
not less than the fair market value of the stock at the time of
grant. Under the Plans, Enron may grant options with a maximum term of 10 years. Options vest under varying schedules.

Summarized information for Enron’s Plans is as follows:
2000

(Shares in thousands)
Outstanding,
beginning of year
Granted
Exercised (a)
Forfeited
Expired
Outstanding, end of year
Exercisable, end of year
Available for grant, end of year (b)
Weighted average fair value of options granted

1999
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price

Shares
93,531
39,167
(32,235)
(4,358)
(42)
96,063
46,755
22,066

$26.74
70.02
24.43
35.68
23.75
$44.24
$29.85

Shares
79,604
35,118
(19,705)
(1,465)
(21)
93,531
52,803
24,864

$13.35

1998
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price
$19.60
37.49
18.08
24.51
18.79
$26.74
$22.56

Shares
78,858
15,702
(13,072)
(1,498)
(386)
79,604
45,942
10,498

$ 7.24

Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price
$17.89
24.99
15.70
19.77
19.76
$19.60
$18.16
$ 4.20

(a) In 2000, Enron recorded tax benefits related to stock options exercised by employees of approximately $390 million reflected in shareholders’ equity.
(b) Includes up to 20,707,969 shares, 22,140,962 shares and 10,497,670 shares as of December 31, 2000, 1999 and 1998, respectively, which may be issued either as
restricted stock or pursuant to stock options.

The following table summarizes information about stock options outstanding at December 31, 2000 (shares in thousands):

Range of Exercise Prices
$ 6.88 to $ 20.00
20.06 to 34.81
35.03 to 47.31
50.48 to 69.00
71.06 to 86.63

Restricted Stock Plan
Under Enron’s Restricted Stock Plan, participants may be
granted stock without cost to the participant. The shares granted
under this plan vest to the participants at various times ranging
from immediate vesting to vesting at the end of a five-year period.
Upon vesting, the shares are released to the participants. The
following summarizes shares of restricted stock under this plan:
(Shares in thousands)
Outstanding, beginning of year
Granted
Released to participants
Forfeited
Outstanding, end of year
Available for grant, end of year
Weighted average fair value of
restricted stock granted

12

2000
6,781
2,243
(2,201)
(1,444)
5,379
20,708

1999
6,034
2,672
(1,702)
(223)
6,781
22,141

1998
5,074
2,122
(1,064)
(98)
6,034
10,498

$57.69

$37.38

$23.70

PENSION AND OTHER BENEFITS

Enron maintains a retirement plan (the Enron Plan) which is
a noncontributory defined benefit plan covering substantially all
employees in the United States and certain employees in foreign
countries. The benefit accrual is in the form of a cash balance of
5% of annual base pay.
Portland General has a noncontributory defined benefit
pension plan (the Portland General Plan) covering substantially
all of its employees. Benefits under the Portland General Plan
are based on years of service, final average pay and covered
compensation.
Enron Facility Services has a noncontributory defined benefit pension plan (the EFS Plan) covering substantially all of its

Options Exercisable
Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price
$16.72
24.79
40.52
60.18
79.69
$44.24

Number
Exercisable
at 12/31/00
14,001
18,304
8,731
4,072
1,647
46,755

Weighted
Average
Exercise
Price
$16.54
24.13
40.27
61.81
72.36
$29.85

employees. Benefits under the EFS Plan are based on years of
service, final average pay and covered compensation.
Enron also maintains a noncontributory employee stock
ownership plan (ESOP) which covers all eligible employees.
Allocations to individual employees’ retirement accounts within
the ESOP offset a portion of benefits earned under the Enron
Plan. All shares included in the ESOP have been allocated to the
employee accounts. At December 31, 2000 and 1999, 12,600,271
shares and 17,241,731 shares, respectively, of Enron common
stock were held by the ESOP, a portion of which may be used to
offset benefits under the Enron Plan.
Assets of the Enron Plan, the Portland General Plan and the
EFS Plan are comprised primarily of equity securities, fixed
income securities and temporary cash investments. It is Enron’s
policy to fund all pension costs accrued to the extent required by
federal tax regulations.
Enron provides certain postretirement medical, life insurance and dental benefits to eligible employees and their eligible
dependents. Benefits are provided under the provisions of contributory defined dollar benefit plans. Enron is currently funding
that portion of its obligations under these postretirement benefit plans which are expected to be recoverable through rates by
its regulated pipelines and electric utility operations.
Enron accrues these postretirement benefit costs over the
service lives of the employees expected to be eligible to receive
such benefits. Enron is amortizing the transition obligation which
existed at January 1, 1993 over a period of approximately 19 years.
The following table sets forth information related to
changes in the benefit obligations, changes in plan assets, a
reconciliation of the funded status of the plans and components
of the expense recognized related to Enron’s pension and other
postretirement plans:

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Number
Outstanding
at 12/31/00
15,368
24,091
21,520
13,965
21,119
96,063

Options Outstanding
Weighted
Average
Remaining
Contractual
Life
4.7
6.8
6.8
6.5
5.6
6.2

45

(In millions)
Change in benefit obligation
Benefit obligation, beginning
of year
Service cost
Interest cost
Plan participants’ contributions
Plan amendments
Actuarial loss (gain)
Acquisitions and divestitures
Effect of curtailment and
settlements (a)
Benefits paid
Benefit obligation, end of year
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets,
beginning of year (b)
Actual return on plan assets
Acquisitions and divestitures
Employer contribution
Plan participants’ contributions
Benefits paid
Fair value of plan assets,
end of year (b)
Reconciliation of funded status,
end of year
Funded status, end of year
Unrecognized transition
obligation (asset)
Unrecognized prior service cost
Unrecognized net actuarial
loss (gain)
Prepaid (accrued) benefit cost
Weighted-average assumptions at
December 31
Discount rate
Expected return on plan
assets (pre-tax)
Rate of compensation increase

Pension Benefits Other Benefits
2000 1999
2000 1999

$708
33
53
9
-

$687
32
49
6
(51)
36

$120 $134
2
2
10
9
4
3
10
(12)
-

(2)
(8)
(55)
(43)
$746 $708

(22) (16)
$124 $120

$853 $774
41
80
37
19
5
(55)
(43)

$ 68 $ 60
(4)
7
7
6
4
3
(11)
(8)

$858

$ 64 $ 68

$853

$112

$145

(6)
25

(13)
32

55
$186

11
$175

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

44
12

48
14

(17) (29)
$ (21) $ (19)

7.75% 7.75% 7.75% 7.75%
(c)
(e)

(c)
(e)

Components of net periodic benefit cost
Service cost
$ 33 $ 32
Interest cost
53
49
Expected return on plan assets
(75)
(70)
Amortization of transition
obligation (asset)
(6)
(6)
Amortization of prior service cost
5
5
Recognized net actuarial loss (gain)
3
Effect of curtailment and
settlements (a)
(6)
Net periodic benefit cost
$ 10 $ 7

46

$ (60) $ (52)

(d)
(e)

$

(d)
(e)

2 $ 2
10
9
(4)
(4)
4
1
(1)

4
1
-

6
$ 12 $ 18

(a) Represents one-time nonrecurring events including the exchange and sale of
EOG (see Note 2) and certain employees ceasing participation in the Portland
General Plan as a result of union negotiations.
(b) Includes plan assets of the ESOP of $116 million and $121 million at December
31, 2000 and 1999, respectively.
(c) Long-term rate of return on assets is assumed to be 10.5% for the Enron Plan,
9.0% for the Portland General Plan and 9.5% for the EFS Plan.
(d) Long-term rate of return on assets is assumed to be 7.5% for the Enron assets
and 9.5% for the Portland General assets.
(e) Rate of compensation increase is assumed to be 4.0% for the Enron Plan,
4.0% to 9.5% for the Portland General Plan and 5.0% for the EFS Plan.

Included in the above amounts are the unfunded obligations
for the supplemental executive retirement plans. At both
December 31, 2000 and 1999, the projected benefit obligation for
these unfunded plans was $56 million and the fair value of assets
was $1 million.

The measurement date of the Enron Plan and the ESOP is
September 30, and the measurement date of the Portland General
Plan, the EFS Plan and the postretirement benefit plans is December
31. The funded status as of the valuation date of the Enron Plan, the
Portland General Plan, the ESOP and the postretirement benefit
plans reconciles with the amount detailed above which is included
in “Other Assets” on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
For measurement purposes, 6% and 10% annual rates of
increase in the per capita cost of covered health care benefits
were assumed for the period 2000 to 2001 for the Enron and
Portland General postretirement plans, respectively. The rates
were assumed to decrease to 5% by 2002 and 2010 for the Enron
and Portland General postretirement plans, respectively. Assumed
health care cost trend rates have a significant effect on the
amounts reported for the health care plans. A one-percentage
point change in assumed health care cost trend rates would have
the following effects:

(In millions)
Effect on total of service and
interest cost components
Effect on postretirement benefit
obligation

1-Percentage
Point Increase

1-Percentage
Point Decrease

$0.4

$(0.3)

$4.4

$(3.8)

Additionally, certain Enron subsidiaries maintain various
incentive based compensation plans for which participants may
receive a combination of cash or stock options, based upon the
achievement of certain performance goals.

13

RATES AND REGULATORY ISSUES

Rates and regulatory issues related to certain of Enron’s
natural gas pipelines and its electric utility operations are subject
to final determination by various regulatory agencies. The
domestic interstate pipeline operations are regulated by the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and the electric
utility operations are regulated by the FERC and the Oregon
Public Utility Commission (OPUC). As a result, these operations
are subject to the provisions of Statement of Financial
Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 71, “Accounting for the Effects
of Certain Types of Regulation,” which recognizes the economic
effects of regulation and, accordingly, Enron has recorded regulatory assets and liabilities related to such operations.
The regulated pipelines operations’ net regulatory assets
were $290 million and $250 million at December 31, 2000 and
1999, respectively, and are expected to be recovered over varying
time periods.
The electric utility operations’ net regulatory assets were
$450 million and $494 million at December 31, 2000 and 1999,
respectively. Based on rates in place at December 31, 2000, Enron
estimates that it will collect substantially all of its regulatory
assets within the next 11 years.

Pipeline Operations
On April 16, 1999, Northern Natural Gas Company
(Northern) filed an uncontested Stipulation and Agreement of
Settlement (Settlement) with the FERC and an order approving
the Settlement was issued by the FERC on June 18, 1999. The
rates effectuated by Northern on November 1, 1999 remain in
effect. On May 1, 2000, Northern filed to implement an optional volumetric firm throughput service. An order approving such
service was issued November 8, 2000 with effectiveness
November 1, 2000; a rehearing request is pending. On
November 1, 2000, Northern filed to increase its rates for the
recovery of return and taxes on its System Levelized Account.

On October 2, 2000 PGE filed a restructuring plan with the
OPUC that implements the provisions of the State Senate Bill
SB1149, signed into law in July 1999. The new law provides industrial and commercial customers of investor-owned utilities in the
state direct access to competing energy suppliers by October 1,
2001. As filed, PGE’s plan also proposes an increase in base rates,
with new tariffs effective on October 1, 2001. PGE is a 67.5%
owner of the Trojan Nuclear Plant (Trojan). In September 2000,
PGE entered into an agreement with the OPUC related to Trojan.
See Note 14. At December 31, 2000, PGE’s regulatory asset related to recovery of Trojan decommissioning costs from customers
was $190 million.
Enron believes, based upon its experience to date and after
considering appropriate reserves that have been established,
that the ultimate resolution of pending regulatory matters will
not have a material impact on Enron’s financial position or
results of operations.

resolution of these matters will not have a material adverse effect
on its financial position or results of operations.
On November 21, 1996, an explosion occurred in or around
the Humberto Vidal Building in San Juan, Puerto Rico. The explosion resulted in fatalities, bodily injuries and damage to the
building and surrounding property. San Juan Gas Company, Inc.
(San Juan Gas), an Enron affiliate, operated a propane/air
distribution system in the vicinity, but did not provide service to
the building. Enron, San Juan Gas, four affiliates and their insurance carriers were named as defendants, along with several third
parties, including The Puerto Rico Aqueduct and Sewer
Authority, Puerto Rico Telephone Company, Heath Consultants
Incorporated, Humberto Vidal, Inc. and their insurance carriers,
in numerous lawsuits filed in U.S. District Court for the District of
Puerto Rico and the Superior Court of Puerto Rico. These suits
seek damages for wrongful death, personal injury, business interruption and property damage allegedly caused by the explosion.
After nearly four years without determining the cause of the
explosion, all parties have agreed not to litigate further that
issue, but to move these suits toward settlements or trials to
determine whether each plaintiff was injured as a result of the
explosion and, if so, the lawful damages attributable to such
injury. The defendants have agreed on a fund for settlements or
final awards. Numerous claims have been settled. Although no
assurances can be given, Enron believes that the ultimate resolution of these matters will not have a material adverse effect on
its financial position or results of operations.

14

Trojan Investment Recovery

Electric Utility Operations

LITIGATION AND OTHER CONTINGENCIES

Enron is a party to various claims and litigation, the significant items of which are discussed below. Although no assurances
can be given, Enron believes, based on its experience to date and
after considering appropriate reserves that have been established, that the ultimate resolution of such items, individually or
in the aggregate, will not have a material adverse impact on
Enron’s financial position or results of operations.

Litigation
In 1995, several parties (the Plaintiffs) filed suit in Harris
County District Court in Houston, Texas, against Intratex Gas
Company (Intratex), Houston Pipe Line Company and Panhandle
Gas Company (collectively, the Enron Defendants), each of which
is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Enron. The Plaintiffs were either
sellers or royalty owners under numerous gas purchase contracts
with Intratex, many of which have terminated. Early in 1996, the
case was severed by the Court into two matters to be tried (or
otherwise resolved) separately. In the first matter, the Plaintiffs
alleged that the Enron Defendants committed fraud and negligent misrepresentation in connection with the “Panhandle program,” a special marketing program established in the early
1980s. This case was tried in October 1996 and resulted in a verdict for the Enron Defendants. In the second matter, the Plaintiffs
allege that the Enron Defendants violated state regulatory
requirements and certain gas purchase contracts by failing to take
the Plaintiffs’ gas ratably with other producers’ gas at certain
times between 1978 and 1988. The trial court certified a class
action with respect to ratability claims. On March 9, 2000, the
Texas Supreme Court ruled that the trial court’s class certification
was improper and remanded the case to the trial court. The Enron
Defendants deny the Plaintiffs’ claims and have asserted various
affirmative defenses, including the statute of limitations. The
Enron Defendants believe that they have strong legal and factual
defenses, and intend to vigorously contest the claims. Although
no assurances can be given, Enron believes that the ultimate

In early 1993, PGE ceased commercial operation of the
Trojan nuclear power generating facility. The OPUC granted PGE,
through a general rate order, recovery of, and a return on, 87
percent of its remaining investment in Trojan.
The OPUC’s general rate order related to Trojan has been subject to litigation in various state courts, including rulings by the
Oregon Court of Appeals and petitions to the Oregon Supreme
Court filed by parties opposed to the OPUC’s order, including the
Utility Reform Project (URP) and the Citizens Utility Board (CUB).
In August 2000, PGE entered into agreements with CUB and
the staff of the OPUC to settle the litigation related to PGE’s
recovery of its investment in the Trojan plant. Under the agreements, CUB agreed to withdraw from the litigation and to support the settlement as the means to resolve the Trojan litigation.
The OPUC approved the accounting and ratemaking elements of
the settlement on September 29, 2000. As a result of these
approvals, PGE’s investment in Trojan is no longer included in
rates charged to customers, either through a return on or a return
of that investment. Collection of ongoing decommissioning costs
at Trojan is not affected by the settlement agreements or the
September 29, 2000 OPUC order. With CUB’s withdrawal, URP is
the one remaining significant adverse party in the litigation. URP
has indicated that it plans to continue to challenge the OPUC
order allowing PGE recovery of its investment in Trojan.
Enron cannot predict the outcome of these actions.
Although no assurances can be given, Enron believes that the
ultimate resolution of these matters will not have a material
adverse effect on its financial position or results of operations.

Environmental Matters
Enron is subject to extensive federal, state and local environmental laws and regulations. These laws and regulations
require expenditures in connection with the construction of new
facilities, the operation of existing facilities and for remediation
at various operating sites. The implementation of the Clean Air
Act Amendments is expected to result in increased operating

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

On November 22, 2000, the FERC issued an order approving the
rates, subject to refund.
On November 1, 2000, Transwestern Pipeline Company
implemented a rate escalation of settled transportation rates in
accordance with its May 1995 global settlement, as amended in
May 1996. On August 23, 1999, Transwestern filed for a new
service, Enhanced Firm Backhaul. An order by the FERC was issued
February 23, 2000, approving the service.

47

expenses. These increased operating expenses are not expected
to have a material impact on Enron’s financial position or results
of operations.
Enron’s natural gas pipeline companies conduct soil and
groundwater remediation on a number of their facilities. Enron
does not expect to incur material expenditures in connection
with soil and groundwater remediation.

15

COMMITMENTS

Firm Transportation Obligations
Enron has firm transportation agreements with various joint
venture and other pipelines. Under these agreements, Enron
must make specified minimum payments each month. At
December 31, 2000, the estimated aggregate amounts of such
required future payments were $91 million, $88 million, $89 million, $85 million and $77 million for 2001 through 2005, respectively, and $447 million for later years.
The costs recognized under firm transportation agreements,
including commodity charges on actual quantities shipped,
totaled $68 million, $55 million and $30 million in 2000, 1999 and
1998, respectively.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Other Commitments

48

Enron leases property, operating facilities and equipment
under various operating leases, certain of which contain renewal
and purchase options and residual value guarantees. Future
commitments related to these items at December 31, 2000 were
$123 million, $98 million, $69 million, $66 million and $49 million
for 2001 through 2005, respectively, and $359 million for later
years. Guarantees under the leases total $556 million at December
31, 2000.
Total rent expense incurred during 2000, 1999 and 1998 was
$143 million, $143 million and $147 million, respectively.
Enron has entered into two development agreements
whereby Enron is required to manage construction of a certain
number of power projects on behalf of third-party owners.
Under one development agreement, where construction is
expected to be completed on or before March 31, 2004, Enron
has agreed to enter into power offtake agreements for varying
portions of the offtake from each facility. Under both development agreements, Enron maintains purchase options, which
may be assigned to a third party. In addition to the purchase
option under the other development agreement, Enron maintains lease options on the power projects. If upon completion,
which is expected to occur on or before August 31, 2002, Enron
has failed to exercise one of its options, Enron may participate
in the remarketing of the power projects which Enron has guaranteed the recovery of 89.9 percent of certain project costs, of
which approximately $140 million has been incurred through
December 31, 2000.
Enron guarantees the performance of certain of its unconsolidated equity affiliates in connection with letters of credit
issued on behalf of those entities. At December 31, 2000, a total
of $264 million of such guarantees were outstanding, including
$103 million on behalf of EOTT Energy Partners, L.P. (EOTT).
In addition, Enron is a guarantor on certain liabilities of unconsolidated equity affiliates and other companies totaling approximately $1,863 million at December 31, 2000, including $538
million related to EOTT trade obligations. The EOTT letters of
credit and guarantees of trade obligations are secured by the
assets of EOTT. Enron has also guaranteed $386 million in lease
obligations for which it has been indemnified by an “Investment
Grade” company. Management does not consider it likely that
Enron would be required to perform or otherwise incur any loss-

es associated with the above guarantees. In addition, certain
commitments have been made related to capital expenditures
and equity investments planned in 2001.
On December 15, 2000, Enron announced that it had
entered into an agreement with Azurix under which the holders
of Azurix’s approximately 39 million publicly traded shares would
receive cash of $8.375 in exchange for each share. The agreement, which is subject to the approval of Azurix shareholders, is
expected to close in early 2001.

16

RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS

In 2000 and 1999, Enron entered into transactions with limited partnerships (the Related Party) whose general partner’s
managing member is a senior officer of Enron. The limited partners of the Related Party are unrelated to Enron. Management
believes that the terms of the transactions with the Related Party
were reasonable compared to those which could have been
negotiated with unrelated third parties.
In 2000, Enron entered into transactions with the Related
Party to hedge certain merchant investments and other assets. As
part of the transactions, Enron (i) contributed to newly-formed
entities (the Entities) assets valued at approximately $1.2 billion,
including $150 million in Enron notes payable, 3.7 million
restricted shares of outstanding Enron common stock and the
right to receive up to 18.0 million shares of outstanding Enron
common stock in March 2003 (subject to certain conditions) and
(ii) transferred to the Entities assets valued at approximately
$309 million, including a $50 million note payable and an investment in an entity that indirectly holds warrants convertible into
common stock of an Enron equity method investee. In return,
Enron received economic interests in the Entities, $309 million in
notes receivable, of which $259 million is recorded at Enron’s
carryover basis of zero, and a special distribution from the
Entities in the form of $1.2 billion in notes receivable, subject to
changes in the principal for amounts payable by Enron in connection with the execution of additional derivative instruments.
Cash in these Entities of $172.6 million is invested in Enron
demand notes. In addition, Enron paid $123 million to purchase
share-settled options from the Entities on 21.7 million shares of
Enron common stock. The Entities paid Enron $10.7 million to
terminate the share-settled options on 14.6 million shares of
Enron common stock outstanding. In late 2000, Enron entered
into share-settled collar arrangements with the Entities on 15.4
million shares of Enron common stock. Such arrangements will
be accounted for as equity transactions when settled.
In 2000, Enron entered into derivative transactions with the
Entities with a combined notional amount of approximately $2.1
billion to hedge certain merchant investments and other assets.
Enron’s notes receivable balance was reduced by $36 million as a
result of premiums owed on derivative transactions. Enron
recognized revenues of approximately $500 million related to
the subsequent change in the market value of these derivatives,
which offset market value changes of certain merchant investments and price risk management activities. In addition, Enron
recognized $44.5 million and $14.1 million of interest income
and interest expense, respectively, on the notes receivable from
and payable to the Entities.
In 1999, Enron entered into a series of transactions involving
a third party and the Related Party. The effect of the transactions
was (i) Enron and the third party amended certain forward
contracts to purchase shares of Enron common stock, resulting in
Enron having forward contracts to purchase Enron common
shares at the market price on that day, (ii) the Related Party
received 6.8 million shares of Enron common stock subject to certain restrictions and (iii) Enron received a note receivable, which

17

ASSET IMPAIRMENT

In 1999, continued significant changes in state and federal
rules regarding the use of MTBE as a gasoline additive have
significantly impacted Enron’s view of the future prospects for
this business. As a result, Enron completed a reevaluation of its
position and strategy with respect to its operated MTBE assets
which resulted in (i) the purchase of certain previously-leased
MTBE related assets, under provisions within the lease, in order
to facilitate future actions, including the potential disposal of
such assets and (ii) a review of all MTBE-related assets for impairment considering the recent adverse changes and their impact on
recoverability. Based on this review and disposal discussions with
market participants, in 1999, Enron recorded a $441 million
pre-tax charge for the impairment of its MTBE-related assets.

18

ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS

Cumulative Effect of Accounting Changes
In 1999, Enron recorded an after-tax charge of $131 million
to reflect the initial adoption (as of January 1, 1999) of two new
accounting pronouncements, the AICPA Statement of Position
98-5 (SOP 98-5), “Reporting on the Costs of Start-Up Activities”
and the Emerging Issues Task Force Issue No. 98-10, “Accounting
for Contracts Involved in Energy Trading and Risk Management
Activities.” The 1999 charge was primarily related to the adoption of SOP 98-5.

Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In 1998, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)
issued SFAS No. 133, “Accounting for Derivative Instruments
and Hedging Activities,” which was subsequently amended by
SFAS No. 137 and SFAS No. 138. SFAS No. 133 must be applied
to all derivative instruments and certain derivative instruments
embedded in hybrid instruments and requires that such instruments be recorded in the balance sheet either as an asset or
liability measured at its fair value through earnings, with special
accounting allowed for certain qualifying hedges. Enron will
adopt SFAS No. 133 as of January 1, 2001. Due to the adoption
of SFAS No. 133, Enron will recognize an after-tax non-cash loss
of approximately $5 million in earnings and an after-tax noncash gain in “Other Comprehensive Income,” a component of
shareholders’ equity, of approximately $22 million from the
cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle. Enron
will also reclassify $532 million from “Long-Term Debt” to
“Other Liabilities” due to the adoption.
The total impact of Enron’s adoption of SFAS No. 133 on
earnings and on “Other Comprehensive Income” is dependent
upon certain pending interpretations, which are currently
under consideration, including those related to “normal purchases and normal sales” and inflation escalators included in
certain contract payment provisions. The interpretations of
these issues, and others, are currently under consideration by
the FASB. While the ultimate conclusions reached on interpretations being considered by the FASB could impact the effects
of Enron’s adoption of SFAS No. 133, Enron does not believe
that such conclusions would have a material effect on its current estimate of the impact of adoption.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

was repaid in December 1999, and certain financial instruments
hedging an investment held by Enron. Enron recorded the assets
received and equity issued at estimated fair value. In connection
with the transactions, the Related Party agreed that the senior
officer of Enron would have no pecuniary interest in such Enron
common shares and would be restricted from voting on matters
related to such shares. In 2000, Enron and the Related Party
entered into an agreement to terminate certain financial instruments that had been entered into during 1999. In connection
with this agreement, Enron received approximately 3.1 million
shares of Enron common stock held by the Related Party. A put
option, which was originally entered into in the first quarter of
2000 and gave the Related Party the right to sell shares of Enron
common stock to Enron at a strike price of $71.31 per share, was
terminated under this agreement. In return, Enron paid approximately $26.8 million to the Related Party.
In 2000, Enron sold a portion of its dark fiber inventory
to the Related Party in exchange for $30 million cash and a $70
million note receivable that was subsequently repaid. Enron
recognized gross margin of $67 million on the sale.
In 2000, the Related Party acquired, through securitizations,
approximately $35 million of merchant investments from Enron.
In addition, Enron and the Related Party formed partnerships in
which Enron contributed cash and assets and the Related Party
contributed $17.5 million in cash. Subsequently, Enron sold a portion of its interest in the partnership through securitizations. See
Note 3. Also, Enron contributed a put option to a trust in which
the Related Party and Whitewing hold equity and debt interests.
At December 31, 2000, the fair value of the put option was a $36
million loss to Enron.
In 1999, the Related Party acquired approximately $371 million of merchant assets and investments and other assets from
Enron. Enron recognized pre-tax gains of approximately $16 million related to these transactions. The Related Party also entered
into an agreement to acquire Enron’s interests in an unconsolidated equity affiliate for approximately $34 million.

49

19

QUARTERLY FINANCIAL DATA (UNAUDITED)
Summarized quarterly financial data is as follows:

(In millions, except
per share amounts)
2000
Revenues
Income before interest, minority
interests and income taxes
Net income
Earnings per share:
Basic
Diluted
1999
Revenues
Income before interest, minority
interests and income taxes
Net income
Earnings per share:
Basic
Diluted

First
Quarter

Second
Quarter

Third
Quarter

Fourth
Quarter

Total
Year (a)

$13,145

$16,886

$30,007

$40,751

$100,789

624
338

609
289

666
292

583
60

2,482
979

$

0.44
0.40

$

0.37
0.34

$

0.37
0.34

$

0.05
0.05

$

1.22
1.12

$ 7,632

$ 9,672

$11,835

$10,973

$ 40,112

533
122

469
222

520
290

473
259

1,995
893

$

0.17
0.16

$

0.29
0.27

$

0.38
0.35

$

0.33
0.31

$

1.17
1.10

(a) The sum of earnings per share for the four quarters may not equal earnings per share for the total year due to changes in the average number of common
shares outstanding.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

20

50

GEOGRAPHIC AND BUSINESS SEGMENT INFORMATION

Enron’s business is divided into operating segments, defined
as components of an enterprise about which financial information is available and evaluated regularly by the chief operating
decision maker, or decision-making group, in deciding how to
allocate resources to an individual segment and in assessing
performance of the segment. Enron’s chief operating decisionmaking group is the Office of the Chairman.
Enron’s chief operating decision-making group evaluates
performance and allocates resources based on income before
interest, minority interests and income taxes (IBIT) as well as on
net income. Certain costs related to company-wide functions are
allocated to each segment. However, interest on corporate debt
is primarily maintained at Corporate and is not allocated to the
segments. Therefore, management believes that IBIT is the dominant measurement of segment profits consistent with Enron’s
consolidated financial statements. The accounting policies of the
segments are substantially the same as those described in the
summary of significant accounting policies in Note 1.
Beginning in 2000, Enron’s communications business is
being managed as a separate operating segment named
Broadband Services and therefore, based on criteria set by SFAS
No. 131, “Disclosures about Segments of an Enterprise and
Related Information,” is reported separately.
Enron has divided its operations into the following
reportable segments, based on similarities in economic characteristics, products and services, types of customers, methods of
distributions and regulatory environment.
Transportation and Distribution – Regulated industries.
Interstate transmission of natural gas. Management and operation of pipelines. Electric utility operations.
Wholesale Services – Energy commodity sales and services,
risk management products and financial services to wholesale
customers. Development, acquisition and operation of power
plants, natural gas pipelines and other energy-related assets.
Retail Energy Services – Sales of natural gas and electricity
directly to end-use customers, particularly in the commercial
and industrial sectors, including the outsourcing of energyrelated activities.

Broadband Services – Construction and management of a
nationwide fiber optic network, the marketing and management
of bandwidth and the delivery of high-bandwidth content.
Exploration and Production – Natural gas and crude oil
exploration and production primarily in the United States,
Canada, Trinidad and India until August 16, 1999. See Note 2.
Corporate and Other – Includes operation of water and
renewable energy businesses as well as clean fuels plants.
Financial information by geographic and business segment
follows for each of the three years in the period ended
December 31, 2000.

Geographic Segments

(In millions)
Operating revenues from
unaffiliated customers
United States
Foreign
Income before interest, minority
interests and income taxes
United States
Foreign

Year Ended December 31,
2000
1999
1998

$ 77,891
22,898
$100,789

$30,176
9,936
$40,112

$25,247
6,013
$31,260

$

2,131
351
2,482

$ 1,273
722
$ 1,995

$ 1,008
574
$ 1,582

$ 10,899
844
$ 11,743

$ 8,286
2,395
$10,681

$ 9,382
1,275
$10,657

$
Long-lived assets
United States
Foreign

Business Segments

(In millions)
1999
Unaffiliated revenues (a)
Intersegment revenues (b)
Total revenues
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Operating income (loss)
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated equity affiliates
Gains on sales of assets and investments
Interest income
Other income, net
Income (loss) before interest, minority
interests and income taxes
Capital expenditures
Identifiable assets
Investments in and advances to
unconsolidated equity affiliates
Total assets
1998
Unaffiliated revenues (a)
Intersegment revenues (b)
Total revenues
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Operating income (loss)
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated equity affiliates
Gains on sales of assets and investments
Interest income
Other income, net
Income (loss) before interest, minority
interests and income taxes
Capital expenditures
Identifiable assets
Investments in and advances to
unconsolidated equity affiliates
Total assets

Wholesale
Services

Retail
Energy
Services

Broadband
Services

$2,742
213
2,955
278
565
65
25
6
71

$93,278
1,628
94,906
343
1,668
486
9
171
(74)

$3,824
791
4,615
38
58
(60)
74
121
5
(33)

$ 408
408
77
(64)
1
3
-

732
270
7,509

2,260
1,280
43,920

165
70
4,266

774
$8,283

4,014
$47,934

Transportation
and
Distribution

Corporate
and
Other (d)
$

Total

537
(2,632)
(2,095)
119
(274)
(405)
38
27
(1)

$100,789
100,789
855
1,953
87
146
121
212
(37)

(60)
436
1,313

(615)
325
3,201

2,482
2,381
60,209

104
$4,370

24
$1,337

378
$ 3,579

5,294
$ 65,503

Wholesale
Services

Retail
Energy
Services

Exploration
and
Production (c)

Corporate
and
Other (d)

Total

$2,013
19
2,032
247
551
50
19
20
45

$35,501
786
36,287
294
889
237
11
126
54

$1,518
289
1,807
29
(81)
5
8

$ 429
97
526
213
66
(1)

$ 651
(1,191)
(540)
87
(623)
22
511
11
75

$ 40,112
40,112
870
802
309
541
162
181

685
316
7,148

1,317
1,216
18,501

(68)
64
956

65
226
-

(4)
541
1,740

1,995
2,363
28,345

811
$7,959

2,684
$21,185

$ 956

$

-

1,541
$ 3,281

5,036
$ 33,381

$1,833
16
1,849
253
562
33
31
9
2

$27,220
505
27,725
195
880
42
4
67
(25)

$1,072
1,072
31
(124)
(2)
7

$ 750
134
884
315
133
1
(6)

$

385
(655)
(270)
33
(73)
24
21
11
(15)

$ 31,260
31,260
827
1,378
97
56
88
(37)

637
310
6,955

968
706
12,205

(119)
75
747

128
690
3,001

(32)
124
2,009

1,582
1,905
24,917

661
$7,616

2,632
$14,837

$ 747

$3,001

1,140
$ 3,149

4,433
$ 29,350

(a) Unaffiliated revenues include sales to unconsolidated equity affiliates.
(b) Intersegment sales are made at prices comparable to those received from unaffiliated customers and in some instances are affected by regulatory considerations.
(c) Reflects results through August 16, 1999. See Note 2.
(d) Includes consolidating eliminations.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

(In millions)
2000
Unaffiliated revenues (a)
Intersegment revenues (b)
Total revenues
Depreciation, depletion and amortization
Operating income (loss)
Equity in earnings of unconsolidated equity affiliates
Gains on sales of assets and investments
Gain on the issuance of stock by TNPC, Inc.
Interest income
Other income, net
Income (loss) before interest, minority
interests and income taxes
Capital expenditures
Identifiable assets
Investments in and advances to
unconsolidated equity affiliates
Total assets

Transportation
and
Distribution

51

Selected Financial and Credit Information (Unaudited)
The following review of the credit characteristics of Enron Corp. and its subsidiaries and affiliates should be read in conjunction with the
Consolidated Financial Statements. The credit information that follows represents management’s calculation of certain key credit ratios of
Enron.
(In millions)
Total Obligations
Balance sheet debt (short- and long-term)

2000

1999

$10,229

$ 8,152

Balance Sheet

180
715
(239)
$ 8,808

Note 15
Note 15
Balance Sheet
Note 7
Note 9
Note 15

Total Obligations

213
556
(532)
$10,466

Shareholders’ Equity and Certain Other Items
Shareholders’ Equity

$11,470

$ 9,570

Balance Sheet

Items added to shareholders’ equity:
Minority interests
Company-obligated preferred securities of subsidiaries
Total Shareholders’ Equity and Certain Other Items

2,414
904
$14,788

2,430
1,000
$13,000

Balance Sheet, Note 8
Balance Sheet, Note 10

Funds Flow from Operations
Net cash provided by operating activities
Changes in working capital
Funds Flow from Operations

$ 4,779
1,769
$ 3,010

$ 1,228
(1,000)
$ 2,228

Cash Flow Statement
Cash Flow Statement

$

$

$

876
(38)
838

$

710
(54)
656

Estimated Lease Interest Expense (f)

$

106

$

124

Adjusted Earnings for Credit Analysis
Income before interest, minority interests and income taxes

$ 2,482

$ 1,995

(146)
326

(541)
441

(276)
106
$ 2,492

173
124
$ 2,192

Items added to liability profile:
Guarantees (a)
Residual value guarantees of synthetic leases
Net liability from price risk management activities (b)
Debt exchangeable for EOG Resources, Inc. shares (c)
Debt of unconsolidated equity affiliates (d)
Firm transportation obligations (e)

Interest and Estimated Lease Interest Expense
Interest incurred
Capitalized interest
Interest and Related Charges, net

Adjustments to IBIT:
Gain on sales of non-merchant assets
Impairment of long-lived assets (including equity investments)
Distributions in excess of (less than) earnings
of unconsolidated equity affiliates
Estimated lease interest expense (f)
Total Adjusted Earnings for Credit Analysis

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Key Credit Ratios
Funds flow interest coverage (g)
Pretax interest coverage (h)
Funds flow from operations/Total obligations
Total obligations/Total obligations plus Total
shareholders’ equity and certain other items
Debt/Total Capital ( i)

52

4.07
2.54
28.8%

3.67
2.63
25.3%

41.4%
40.9%

40.4%
38.5%

Source

Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Income Statement

Income Statement

Cash Flow Statement
Cash Flow Statement
Note 9

(a) Management estimates Enron’s risk adjusted exposure on uncollateralized guarantees is approximately 10% of the total nominal value of the guarantees issued.
(b) Excess of price risk management liabilities over price risk management assets.
(c) Enron expects to extinguish this obligation by delivering shares of EOG Resources, Inc. stock.
(d) Debt of unconsolidated equity affiliates is non-recourse and therefore is excluded from Enron’s obligations.
(e) Firm transportation obligations are excluded, as contracted capacity has market value.
(f) Management estimates Enron’s lease interest expense for the year based on the average minimum lease payment or commitment (excluding principal repayments and other items).
(g) Calculated as funds flow from operations plus interest incurred and estimated lease interest expense, divided by interest incurred and estimated lease interest expense.
(h) Calculated as total adjusted earnings divided by interest incurred and estimated lease interest expense.
(i) Total capital includes debt, minority interests, company-obligated preferred securities of subsidiaries and shareholders’ equity.

OUR VALUES
Communication
We have an obligation to communicate. Here, we take the time to
talk with one another… and to listen. We believe that information
is meant to move and that information moves people.
Respect
We treat others as we would like to be treated ourselves. We do
not tolerate abusive or disrespectful treatment.
Integrity
We work with customers and prospects openly, honestly and sincerely. When we say we will do something, we will do it; when we
say we cannot or will not do something, then we won’t do it.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

Excellence
We are satisfied with nothing less than the very best in everything
we do. We will continue to raise the bar for everyone. The great
fun here will be for all of us to discover just how good we can
really be.

53

Board of
Directors

ROBERT A. BELFER (1, 3)
New York, New York
Chairman, Belco Oil & Gas Corp.
NORMAN P. BLAKE, JR. (3, 4)
Colorado Springs, Colorado
Chairman, President and CEO,
Comdisco, Inc., and Former CEO
and Secretary General, United States
Olympic Committee
RONNIE C. CHAN (2, 3)
Hong Kong
Chairman, Hang Lung Group

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

JOHN H. DUNCAN (1*, 4)
Houston, Texas
Former Chairman of the Executive
Committee of Gulf & Western Industries, Inc.

54

WENDY L. GRAMM (2, 5)
Washington, D.C.
Director of the Regulatory Studies
Program of the Mercatus Center at
George Mason University
Former Chairman, U.S. Commodity Futures
Trading Commission
KEN L. HARRISON
Portland, Oregon
Former Chairman and CEO, Portland
General Electric Company
ROBERT K. JAEDICKE (2*, 4)
Stanford, California
Professor of Accounting (Emeritus) and
Former Dean, Graduate School of Business,
Stanford University
KENNETH L. LAY (1)
Houston, Texas
Chairman, Enron Corp.
CHARLES A. LEMAISTRE (1, 4*)
San Antonio, Texas
President Emeritus, University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center

JOHN MENDELSOHN (2, 5)
Houston, Texas
President, University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
JEROME J. MEYER (3, 5)
Wilsonville, Oregon
Chairman, Tektronix, Inc.
PAULO V. FERRAZ PEREIRA(2, 3)
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Executive Vice President of Group Bozano
Former President and COO, Meridional
Financial Group, and Former President and
CEO, State Bank of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
FRANK SAVAGE (3, 4)
Stamford, Connecticut
Chairman, Alliance Capital Management
International (a division of Alliance Capital
Management L.P.)
JEFFREY K. SKILLING (1)
Houston, Texas
President and CEO, Enron Corp.

JOHN A. URQUHART (3)
Fairfield, Connecticut
Senior Advisor to the Chairman, Enron
Corp., President, John A. Urquhart
Associates, and Former Senior Vice
President of Industrial and Power Systems,
General Electric Company
JOHN WAKEHAM (2, 5*)
London, England
Former U.K. Secretary of State for Energy
and Leader of the Houses of Lords and
Commons

FROM LEFT TO RIGHT:
Top row: John Mendelsohn, Jeffrey K. Skilling and
Frank Savage
Middle row: Charles A. LeMaistre, Ronnie C. Chan,
Herbert S. Winokur, Jr., Kenneth L. Lay, Wendy L.
Gramm, Robert K. Jaedicke, John Wakeham and
Robert A. Belfer
Bottom row: John H. Duncan, Paulo V. Ferraz
Pereira, John A. Urquhart, Norman P. Blake, Jr.,
Ken L. Harrison and Jerome J.Meyer

Executive Committee
Audit Committee
Finance Committee
(4)
Compensation Committee
(5)
Nominating Committee
*
Denotes Chairman
(1)
(2)
(3)

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

HERBERT S. WINOKUR, JR. (1, 3*)
Greenwich, Connecticut
President, Winokur Holdings, Inc., and
Former Senior Executive Vice President,
Penn Central Corporation

55

Enron Corporate Policy Committee
KEN LAY

CLIFF BAXTER

STAN HORTON

Chairman, Enron

Vice Chairman &
Chief Strategic Officer, Enron

Chairman & CEO,
Enron Transportation Services

RICK CAUSEY

STEVE KEAN

Executive Vice President &
Chief Accounting Officer, Enron

Executive Vice President &
Chief of Staff, Enron

DAVE DELAINEY

LOU PAI

Chairman & CEO,
Enron Energy Services

Chairman & CEO,
Enron Xcelerator

JIM DERRICK

KEN RICE

Executive Vice President &
General Counsel, Enron

Chairman & CEO,
Enron Broadband Services

ANDY FASTOW

JOHN SHERRIFF

Executive Vice President &
Chief Financial Officer, Enron

President & CEO,
Enron Europe

MARK FREVERT

GREG WHALLEY

Chairman & CEO,
Enron Wholesale Services

President & COO,
Enron Wholesale Services

JEFF SKILLING
President and Chief Executive Officer,
Enron

KEVIN HANNON
Chief Operating Officer,
Enron Broadband Services

Shareholder Information
TRANSFER AGENT, REGISTRAR,
DIVIDEND PAYING AND
REINVESTMENT PLAN AGENT
(DIRECTSERVICE PROGRAM)
First Chicago Trust Company
c/o EquiServe
P.O. Box 2500
Jersey City, NJ 07303-2500
(800) 519-3111
(201) 324-1225
TDD: (201) 222-4955
For direct deposit of dividends only, call:
(800) 870-2340
Internet address:
http://www.equiserve.com

2000 ANNUAL REPORT
This Annual Report and the statements
contained herein are submitted for the
general information of the shareholders
of Enron Corp. and are not intended for
use in connection with or to induce the
sale or purchase of securities.

ENRON ANNUAL REPORT 2000

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

56

Enron Corp.’s Annual Report to shareholders and Form 10-K report to the
Securities and Exchange Commission
are available upon request on Enron’s
Internet address http://www.enron.com
For information regarding specific
shareholder questions, write or call the
Transfer Agent.

Financial analysts and investors who need
additional information should contact:
Enron Corp.
Investor Relations Dept.
P.O. Box 1188, Suite 4926B
Houston, TX 77251-1188
(713) 853-3956
Enron’s Internet address:
http://www.enron.com

ANNUAL MEETING OF
SHAREHOLDERS
The Annual Meeting of Shareholders will
be held in Houston, Texas, in the LaSalle
Ballroom of the Doubletree Hotel at
Allen Center, 400 Dallas Street, on
Tuesday, May 1, 2001, at 10 a.m.
Information with respect to this meeting
is contained in the Proxy Statement
sent with this Annual Report to holders
of record of Enron Corp.’s Common
Stock and the Cumulative Second
Preferred Convertible Stock on March
2, 2001. The 2000 Annual Report is not
to be considered a part of the proxy
soliciting material.

DIVIDEND REINVESTMENT
The Transfer Agent offers holders of
Enron Corp. Common Stock the opportunity to reinvest part or all of their
dividends in the purchase of additional
shares of Common Stock by participating

in the DirectSERVICE Program for
Shareholders of Enron Corp. This program gives almost everyone the opportunity to purchase additional shares of
Common Stock without paying a brokerage commission. Anyone wishing to
participate in the program may, upon
timely application, reinvest some, all,
or none of the cash dividends paid on
their Common Stock, or make optional
cash payments of as little as $25, after
an initial investment of $250 for new
shareholders, with a limit of $120,000
per calendar year. Direct requests for
further information to:
DirectSERVICE Program for
Shareholders of Enron Corp.
c/o First Chicago Trust Company
c/o EquiServe
P.O. Box 2598
Jersey City, NJ 07303-2598
Shareholders may call: (800) 519-3111
Non-shareholders requests for program
materials:
(800) 662-7662
Internet address:
http://www.equiserve.com
TDD: (201) 222-4955

Enron Annual Report 2000

1400 Smith Street
Houston, Texas 77002-7361
www.enron.com

© 2001 Enron Corp. Enron and the Enron logo are registered trademarks, and
Endless possibilities, EnronOnline, DealBench, energydesk.com, Commoditylogic
and Clickpaper.com are trademarks of Enron Corp. or one of its subsidiaries.
Other company, product and services names may be trademarks of others.

